[page 1]
W H O T r a d i t i o n a l M e d i c i n e S t r a t e g y 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 2 3
2 0 1 4 - 2 0 2 3
WHO Traditional 
Medicine Strategy

[page 2]
2014-2023
WHO Traditional 
Medicine Strategy

[page 3]
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
WHO traditional medicine strategy: 2014-2023.
1.Medicine, Traditional. 2.Complementary therapies. 3.Health planning. 4.Delivery of health care. 5.Health 
policy. I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 150609 0 (NLM classification: WB 55) 
© World Health Organization 2013
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site
(www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia,
1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; 
e-mail: bookorders@who.int). 
 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications –whether for sale or for non-commercial 
distribution– should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO web site (www.who.int/about/licensing/
copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of 
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines 
on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
 
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed 
or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not 
mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital 
letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained 
in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either 
expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no 
event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use. 
Printed in Hong Kong SAR, China

[page 4]
3
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Contents
Acknowledgements .................................................................................... 5
Foreword ...................................................................................................7
Acronyms used in this document ................................................................ 9
Executive Summary ................................................................................... 11
1. Introduction .................................................................................... 15
2. Global progress ............................................................................... 21
2.1 Policy and regulations ........................................................................ 21
2.2 Practices ...................................................................................... 22
2.3 Education and research ................................................................ 22
3. Global review of T&CM ................................................................... 25
3.1 Continuing demand for T&CM products, practices and
 practitioners ............................................................................... 25
3.2 Use of T&CM .............................................................................. 26
3.3 Regulation of T&CM products, practices and practitioners .......... 30
3.4 Universal health coverage and integration of T&CM ................... 35
3.5 Opportunities and challenges ..................................................... 40
4. Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions .. 43
4.1 Strategic objective 1: To build the knowledge base for active
 management of T&CM through appropriate national policies ...... 44
4.2 Strategic objective 2: To strengthen the quality assurance, safety,
 proper use and effectiveness of T&CM by regulating products,
 practices and practitioners. .......................................................... 49
4.3 Strategic objective 3: To promote universal health coverage
 by integrating T&CM services into health care service delivery and
 self-health care ............................................................................ 53
5. Implementing the strategy ............................................................ 57
References ................................................................................................ 59
Annex A – Selected examples of notable T&CM initiatives by 
 region/country ......................................................................... 63
Annex B – Information on selected global T&CM professional
 organizations ............................................................................ 68
Annex C – Selected WHO publications on T&CM ...................................... 70

[page 6]
5
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Acknowledgements
During the process of preparing this updated strategy over the past two years, 
the draft version was sent for review and comment to Member States across 
the six WHO regions, 20 WHO Collaborating Centres for Traditional Medicine, 
22 members of WHO’s Expert Advisory Panel on Traditional Medicine, global 
professional organizations in the field of traditional medicine, in particular five 
NGOs which have built up official relationships or working relations with WHO, 
and three related UN agencies – World Intellectual Property Organization, 
World Trade Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. It has also profited from their experience and expertise. Four technical 
working group meetings (TWG) were conducted to revise the draft. Invited 
experts and governmental representatives from six WHO regions participated 
in the TWG meetings. Regional Advisors for Traditional Medicine in the six 
WHO regions and relevant technical units or departments within WHO were 
consulted and supplied material. Information from 129 countries’ reports and 
other sources supported the development of the strategy. 
A. Burton, T. Falkenberg, M. Smith, Q. Zhang and X. Zhang were the members 
of the drafting group. Former directors of the WHO Department for Health 
Systems Policies and Workforce, T. Boerma and W. Lerberghe, provided 
guidance and inputs. The coordinator of the Traditional and Complementary 
Medicine Programme, Q. Zhang, undertook revision and editing. E. Asio and 
Y. Maruyama provided secretarial support. 
The government of the People’s Republic of China kindly provided financial 
support for the development of the document. The government of Hong 
Kong SAR, the People’s Republic of China and WHO Collaborating Center for 
Traditional Medicine in Hong Kong provided technical, financial and logistical 
support for the meetings of three working groups, the development and the 
printing of the document. 
WHO gratefully acknowledges all the above-mentioned governments, 
institutions, organizations and experts.

[page 8]
7
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Foreword
Across the world, traditional medicine (TM) is either the mainstay of health care 
delivery or serves as a complement to it. In some countries, traditional medicine 
or non-conventional medicine may be termed complementary medicine (CM). 
The WHA resolution on Traditional Medicine (WHA62.13), adopted in 2009, 
requested the WHO Director-General to update the WHO Traditional medicine 
strategy 2002-2005, based on countries’ progress and current new challenges 
in the field of traditional medicine. The WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 
2014-2023 thus reappraises and builds on the WHO Traditional Medicine 
Strategy 2002–2005, and sets out the course for TM and CM (T&CM) in the 
next decade.
 
T&CM is an important and often underestimated part of health care. T&CM is 
found in almost every country in the world and the demand for its services is 
increasing. TM, of proven quality, safety, and efficacy, contributes to the goal 
of ensuring that all people have access to care. Many countries now recognize 
the need to develop a cohesive and integrative approach to health care that 
allows governments, health care practitioners and, most importantly, those 
who use health care services, to access T&CM in a safe, respectful, cost-efficient 
and effective manner. A global strategy to foster its appropriate integration, 
regulation and supervision will be useful to countries wishing to develop a 
proactive policy towards this important - and often vibrant and expanding - 
part of health care.
Much has changed since the previous global strategy was published in 2002. 
More countries have gradually come to accept the contribution that T&CM can 
make to the health and well-being of individuals and to the comprehensiveness 
of their health-care systems. Governments and consumers are interested in 
more than herbal medicines, and are now beginning to consider aspects of 
T&CM practices and practitioners and whether they should be integrated into 
health service delivery. In order to meet this new demand, and in response to 
Resolution WHA62.13 on TM, WHO recently updated the objectives of the 
Traditional Medicine Programme.

[page 9]
8
The WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-2023 will help health care leaders 
to develop solutions that contribute to a broader vision of improved health and 
patient autonomy. The strategy has two key goals: to support Member States in 
harnessing the potential contribution of T&CM to health, wellness and people-
centred health care and to promote the safe and effective use of T&CM through 
the regulation of products, practices and practitioners. These goals will be 
reached by implementing three strategic objectives: 1) building the knowledge 
base and formulating national policies; 2) strengthening safety, quality and 
effectiveness through regulation; and, 3) promoting universal health coverage 
by integrating T&CM services and self-health care into national health systems.
Updating and enhancing the strategy has allowed WHO to acquire a better 
understanding of how to boost the global integration of T&CM into health 
systems. My hope is that it will provide Member States with a road map to 
achieving further success in their T&CM strategic planning. 
I am very pleased to introduce the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-
2023. It is my conviction that it will be a valuable tool for governments, system 
planners and health practitioners and – most crucially – will benefit individuals 
seeking the right care, from the right practitioner, at the right time.
 Dr Margaret Chan
 Director-General
Foreword

[page 10]
9
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Acronyms used in this document
AFRO – WHO Regional Office for Africa
AMRO/PAHO – WHO Regional Office for the Americas/Pan American Health 
 Organization
EMRO – WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean
EURO – WHO Regional Office for Europe
IRCH – International Regulatory Cooperation for Herbal Medicines 
PHC – Primary Health care
SEARO – WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia
UHC – Universal Health Coverage
WHA – World Health Assembly
WHO – World Health Organization
WIPO – World Intellectual Property Organization
WPRO – WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific
WTO – World Trade Organization

[page 12]
11
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Executive summary
Traditional medicine (TM) is an important and often underestimated part of 
health services. In some countries, traditional medicine or non-conventional 
medicine may be termed complementary medicine (CM). TM has a long 
history of use in health maintenance and in disease prevention and treatment, 
particularly for chronic disease. 
The WHO Traditional Medicine (TM) Strategy 2014–2023 was developed in 
response to the World Health Assembly resolution on traditional medicine 
(WHA62.13) (1). The goals of the strategy are to support Member States in:
n harnessing the potential contribution of TM to health, wellness and people-
centred health care;
n promoting the safe and effective use of TM by regulating, researching and 
integrating TM products, practitioners and practice into health systems, 
where appropriate.
The strategy aims to support Member States in developing proactive policies 
and implementing action plans that will strengthen the role TM plays in keeping 
populations healthy. It seeks to build upon the WHO Traditional Medicine 
Strategy 2002–2005, which reviewed the status of TM globally and in Member 
States, and set out four key objectives:
n policy — integrate TM within national health care systems, where feasible, 
by developing and implementing national TM policies and programmes.
n safety, efficacy and quality — promote the safety, efficacy and quality of TM 
by expanding the knowledge base, and providing guidance on regulatory 
and quality assurance standards.
n access — increase the availability and affordability of TM, with an emphasis 
on access for poor populations.
n rational use — promote therapeutically sound use of appropriate TM by 
practitioners and consumers.

[page 13]
12
Despite significant progress made in implementing this strategy around the 
world, Member States continue to experience challenges related to:
n development and enforcement of policy and regulations; 
n integration, in particular identifying and evaluating strategies and criteria 
for integrating TM into national and primary health care (PHC); 
n safety and quality, notably assessment of products and services, qualification 
of practitioners, methodology and criteria for evaluating efficacy; 
n ability to control and regulate TM and CM (T&CM) advertising and claims;
n research and development;
n education and training of T&CM practitioners;
n information and communication, such as sharing information about 
policies, regulations, service profiles and research data, or obtaining reliable 
objective information resources for consumers.
This new strategy document aims to address these challenges. It will require 
Member States to determine their own national situations in relation to T&CM, 
and then to develop and enforce policies, regulations and guidelines that reflect 
these realities. Member States can rise to these challenges by organizing their 
activities in the following three strategic sectors: 
 
1. build the knowledge base that will allow T&CM to be managed actively 
through appropriate national policies that understand and recognize the 
role and potential of T&CM.
2. strengthen the quality assurance, safety, proper use and effectiveness of 
T&CM by regulating products, practices and practitioners through T&CM 
education and training, skills development, services and therapies.
3. promote universal health coverage by integrating T&CM services into 
health service delivery and self-health care by capitalizing on their potential 
contribution to improve health services and health outcomes, and by 
ensuring users are able to make informed choices about self-health care.
For each objective, the strategy identifies a number of actions to guide Member 
States, partners and stakeholders, and WHO. The strategy supports Member 
States in designing and implementing a strategic plan in accordance with their 
Executive Summary

[page 14]
13
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
own national capacities, priorities, relevant legislation and circumstances. Its 
aim is to assist Member States in determining and prioritizing their needs, to 
provide for effective delivery of services, to support appropriate regulations 
and policy development and to ensure that these products and practices are 
applied safely. 
It is anticipated that WHO will initiate a review of the implementation of this 
strategy approximately halfway through its term. This midterm review will be 
important in ensuring that the strategy is still relevant and timely as WHO and 
its stakeholders move into the final five years of the forthcoming mandate.

[page 16]
15
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
1. Introduction
In many parts of the world, policy-makers, health professionals and the 
public are wrestling with issues regarding the safety, effectiveness, quality, 
availability, preservation and regulation of traditional and complementary 
medicine (T&CM). T&CM continues to be widely used in most countries, and 
its uptake is increasing rapidly in other countries. At the same time, interest in 
T&CM is expanding beyond products to focus on practices and practitioners. 
As a result, WHO carried out a comprehensive analysis of the current status 
of T&CM around the world and worked with experts to develop the WHO 
Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014–2023, which will address some of these 
important issues. To facilitate the understanding of this strategy, box 1 below 
provides a definition of traditional medicine (TM), complementary medicine 
(CM) and T&CM.
Box 1: T&CM Definitions
Traditional medicine (TM):
Traditional medicine has a long history. It is the sum total of the knowledge, 
skill, and practices based on the theories, beliefs, and experiences 
indigenous to different cultures, whether explicable or not, used in the 
maintenance of health as well as in the prevention, diagnosis, improvement 
or treatment of physical and mental illness. (http://www.who.int/medicines/
areas/traditional/definitions/en/).
Complementary medicine (CM):
The terms “complementary medicine” or “alternative medicine” refer to a 
broad set of health care practices that are not part of that country’s own 
tradition or conventional medicine and are not fully integrated into the 
dominant health-care system. They are used interchangeably with traditional 
medicine in some countries. 
(http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/traditional/definitions/en/).
Traditional and complementary medicine (T&CM):
T&CM merges the terms TM and CM, encompassing products, practices 
and practitioners.

[page 17]
16
T&CM around the world
T&CM is widely used around the world and valued for a number of reasons. 
At the International Conference on Traditional Medicine for South-East Asian 
Countries in February 2013, the WHO Director-General, Dr Margaret Chan, 
stated that “traditional medicines, of proven quality, safety, and efficacy, 
contribute to the goal of ensuring that all people have access to care. For many 
millions of people, herbal medicines, traditional treatments, and traditional 
practitioners are the main source of health care, and sometimes the only 
source of care. This is care that is close to homes, accessible and affordable. 
It is also culturally acceptable and trusted by large numbers of people. The 
affordability of most traditional medicines makes them all the more attractive 
at a time of soaring health-care costs and nearly universal austerity. Traditional 
medicine also stands out as a way of coping with the relentless rise of chronic 
non-communicable diseases.”
1. Regardless of reasons for seeking out T&CM, 
there is little doubt that interest has grown, and will almost certainly continue 
to grow, around the world.
WHO support for T&CM
WHO’s mission is to help save lives and improve health. In terms of T&CM, 
WHO promotes these functions by:
n facilitating integration of T&CM into national health systems by helping 
Member States to develop their own national policies in this sector;
n producing guidelines for T&CM by developing and providing international 
standards, technical guidelines and methodologies for research into 
products, practices and practitioners;
n stimulating strategic research into T&CM by providing support for clinical 
research projects on its safety and effectiveness; 
n advocating the rational use of T&CM through the promotion of its evidence-
based use; 
n and mediating information on T&CM by acting as a clearing-house to 
facilitate information exchange.
Introduction
1 Speech given by WHO Director-General, Dr Margaret Chan, at the International Conference on Traditional 
 Medicine for South-East Asian Countries. New Delhi, India, 12-14 February 2013.

[page 18]
17
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Evolution of the WHO TM Strategy 2014–2023
This document is intended to provide information, context, guidance and 
support to policymakers, health service planners, public health specialists, 
traditional and complementary medicine communities and other interested 
parties about T&CM, including products, practices and practitioners. It 
addresses issues in evaluating, regulating and integrating T&CM, as well as in 
harnessing its potential to benefit the health of individuals.
 
The WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014–2023 updates and enhances 
the framework for action laid out in:
n the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005 (2), the first strategy 
document ever prepared by WHO in this field; 
n the traditional medicine sections of the WHO Medicines Strategy 2004–
2007 (3);
n and the traditional medicine components of the WHO Medicines Strategy 
2008–2013 (4). 
This new strategy reviews the potential contribution T&CM can make to 
health, in particular health service delivery, and establishes priority actions 
for the period to 2023. This strategy is an effective and proactive response 
to the World Health Assembly Resolution on traditional medicine (1), which 
encourages Member States to consider T&CM as an important part of the 
health system and builds on the work introduced in the Beijing Declaration, 
adopted by the WHO Congress on Traditional Medicine in 2008. 
This new strategy is an important document for Member States, T&CM 
stakeholders and WHO in positioning T&CM within countries’ health systems. 
The strategy highlights advances in T&CM research and development 
and recognizes the experience gained during implementation of the WHO 
Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005 and the WHO medicines strategies 
mentioned above.

[page 19]
18
The need for a new strategy
WHO and its Member States believe it is important to update and enhance the 
strategy at this time for a number of reasons:
1) Continued uptake of T&CM
The public and consumers of health care worldwide continue to include T&CM 
in their health choices. This obliges Member States to support them in making 
informed decisions about their options.
 
2) T&CM has growing economic importance
T&CM is growing and expanding, particularly with respect to products bought 
in person or over the Internet. The T&CM sector now plays a significant role 
in the economic development of a number of countries. At the same time, 
with prevailing current global financial constraints, use of T&CM for health 
promotion, self-health care and disease prevention may actually reduce health-
care costs.
3) The global nature of T&CM 
T&CM products and practices from one region are used throughout the world 
to complement local health care service delivery, making T&CM a truly global 
phenomenon. This requires a new level of cooperation among Member States 
as the sector continues to work on defining and supporting access to safe 
products and practices.
4) Levels of education, accreditation and regulation of 
T&CM practices and practitioners vary considerably
In an increasingly globalized world, individuals move freely from country to 
country in order to live and work. Given this trend, a better understanding of 
T&CM practitioners is needed to ensure professional consistency and safety.
5) Recent advances in T&CM research and development
Since the release of the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005, there 
have been significant advances in what is known about T&CM along with 
the development of technical standards and guidelines for organized health 
service delivery.
 
Introduction

[page 20]
19
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
6) Intellectual property
As T&CM becomes more popular, it is important to balance the need to protect 
the intellectual property rights of indigenous peoples and local communities 
and their health care heritage while ensuring access to T&CM and fostering 
research, development and innovation. Any actions should follow the global 
strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual 
property (5).
7) Integration of T&CM into health systems
As the uptake of T&CM increases, there is a need for its closer integration 
into health systems. Policy makers and consumers should consider how T&CM 
may improve patient experience and population health. Important questions 
of access as well as population and public health issues must be addressed.
This new strategy document reviews progress made worldwide since the WHO 
Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005, including highlights of successes 
and emerging challenges, and provides a framework for action into the next 
decade which will strengthen T&CM globally.

[page 22]
21
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
2. Global progress 
Since the launch of the first the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–
2005 (2), there has been significant and steady progress in implementing, 
regulating and managing T&CM in most regions of the world. Although 
Member States acted on their own initiative, the original strategy document 
played an important role in supporting their efforts (Figures 1 and 2). Statistics 
on global progress have been extrapolated from the recent WHO Global Survey 
on T&CM and are based on the key indicators outlined in the WHO Traditional 
Medicine Strategy 2002–2005 (2). 
2.1 Policy and regulations
Many Member States have made great efforts to advance T&CM, some 
of which can be attributed to the implementation of the WHO Traditional 
Medicine Strategy 2002–2005. In recent years, Member States have established 
or developed national and regional policies and regulations to promote the 
safe and effective use of T&CM. WHO has developed technical guidelines and 
1999a 2003b 2005c 2007d 2012e,f
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Number of MS with 
TM policy
1
22
6
Number of MS regulating 
herbal medicines
25
39
45 48
6965
82
92
110
119
Figure 1: Monitoring changes in country progress indicators defined 
by the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Sources:
a: Reference 2;
b: Reference 3;
c: Reference 6 and 7;
d: Reference 4;
e: Number of MS with TM policy: Combined data from: 1) an interim report of the second WHO global survey (mid-2012; with 129 survey 
 and return) and 2) the 1st WHO global survey result (WHO, 2005);
f: Number of MS regulating herbal medicines: Combined data from: 1) an interim report of the second WHO global survey (mid-2012; with 
 129 survey and return) and 2) the 1st WHO global survey result (WHO, 2005), 3) information on IRCH membership and 4) EU membership.

[page 23]
22
standards and organized trainings/workshops in support of Member States 
(http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/cl/CL10/; see also Annex C). Figure 1 
below shows the progress of Member States regarding established national 
policies on T&CM and national regulations on herbal medicines.
2.2 Practices 
T&CM practices vary widely from country to country with certain practices 
(sometimes called modalities) regarded differently depending on the culture, 
understanding and accessibility of conventional medicine. A practice where 
significant progress has been made is acupuncture. Although acupuncture was 
originally a feature of traditional Chinese medicine, it is now used worldwide. 
According to reports supplied by 129 countries, 80% of them now recognize 
the use of acupuncture (Figure 2). 
Figure 2: The Use of Acupuncture by Member States
Source: Interim data from 2nd WHO TRM global survey as of 11 June 2012.
With 
aknowledged 
usage
With
regulations
for providers
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
With health 
insurance
coverage
Number of Member States
103
29
18
Global progress

[page 24]
23
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
2.3 Education and research
In order to improve the safe and qualified practice of T&CM, Member 
States have developed regulations on the quality, quantity, accreditation 
and education structures for T&CM practitioners, including practitioners of 
conventional medicine who use T&CM. Significant progress has been made in 
1 Communication with WHO from the Government of the Republic of Korea, Ministry of Health and Welfare, 2013.
Figure 3: T&CM education at university level
Source: Interim data from 2nd WHO TRM global survey as of 11 June 2012.
129
With T&CM
at university
level
Not
answered
No T&CM
education at 
university level
72
(56%)
39
(30%)
18
(14%)
many. For example, the number of Member States providing high-level T&CM 
education programmes including Bachelor, Master and Doctoral degrees at 
university level has increased from only a few to 39, representing 30% of the 
surveyed countries (Figure 3).
In the African Region, TM knowledge and practices have been passed on 
orally among traditional health practitioners for many generations. In recent 
years, some countries have strengthened training programmes to develop 
the knowledge of traditional health practitioners. Furthermore, in some 
countries TM is included in university curricula for health profession students. 
For instance, various universities in the Economic Community of West African 
States, Democratic Republic of Congo, South Africa and Tanzania include TM 
in the curricula for pharmacy and medical students (8).
To support Member States in moving towards quality training, WHO has 
published a series of training guidelines and benchmarks (http://apps.who.int/
medicinedocs/en/cl/CL10/; see also Annex C).

[page 25]
24
Sources:
a: Reference 2;
b: Reference 3;
c: Reference 6 and 7;
d: Combined data from: 1) an interim report of the second WHO global survey (mid-2012; with 129 survey and return) and 2) the 
1st WHO global survey result (WHO, 2005) and 3) information on WHO Collaborating Centres for Traditional Medicine.
1999a 2003b 2005c 2012d
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
19
56 58
73
Figure 4: Monitoring changes in country progress indicators defined 
by the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy:
Number of MS with national research institutes in TM/CM (including those in 
herbal medicines)
Global progress
There has also been progress in setting up national research institutes in the 
field of T&CM across the world (Figure 4). The number of Member States 
reporting a national research institute for T&CM has increased significantly.

[page 26]
25
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
3. Global review of T&CM
The global uptake of T&CM, as outlined in section 2.0, shows that significant 
momentum has been achieved over the past decade. In order to finalize a 
strategy for the next ten years, it is important to review and analyse the current 
status of T&CM worldwide. This will help Member States determine how and 
when T&CM should be integrated into their national health systems. 
To give Member States a better understanding of the current status of T&CM 
around the world, WHO has gathered a significant amount of data, the 
scope of which is too extensive for its inclusion in this strategy document. 
Consequently, this review seeks to contextualise what needs to be done rather 
than aiming for comprehensiveness. It highlights the ongoing demand for 
T&CM products, practice and practitioners, describes patterns of use, identifies 
the need for regulation to protect consumers, describes the importance of 
integrating T&CM into universal health coverage and identifies some of the 
difficulties and challenges of integrating T&CM into health systems. 
3.1 Continuing demand for T&CM products, practices 
and practitioners 
Many countries have their own traditional or indigenous forms of healing 
which are firmly rooted in their culture and history. Some forms of TM such 
as Ayurveda, traditional Chinese medicine and Unani medicine are popular 
nationally, as well as being used worldwide. At the same time, some forms of 
CM such as anthroposophic medicine, chiropractic, homeopathy, naturopathy 
and osteopathy are also in extensive use. 
Health systems around the world are experiencing increased levels of chronic 
illness and escalating health care costs. Patients and health care providers alike 
are demanding that health care services be revitalized, with a stronger emphasis 
on individualized, person-centred care (9). This includes expanding access to 
T&CM products, practices and practitioners. Over 100 million Europeans are 
currently T&CM users, with one fifth regularly using T&CM and the same 
number preferring health care which includes T&CM (10). There are many 
more T&CM users in Africa, Asia, Australia and North America (11).

[page 27]
26
3.1.1 Market for products
The diversity of regulations and regulatory categories for T&CM products makes 
it difficult to assess the size of the market for T&CM products across Member 
States with any degree of accuracy. However, available data suggests that the 
market is substantial. The output of Chinese materia medica was estimated to 
amount to US$83.1 billion in 2012, an increase of more than 20% from the 
previous year (12). In the Republic of Korea, annual expenditures on TM were 
US$4.4 billion in 2004, rising to US$7.4 billion in 2009 (13). Out-of-pocket 
spending for natural products in the United States was US$14.8 billion in 2008 
(14). 
3.1.2 Demand for T&CM practices and practitioners
There is significant demand for T&CM practices and practitioners 
worldwide. In Australia, visits to complementary health professionals such 
as acupuncturists, chiropractors and naturopaths have been growing 
rapidly with an increase of over 30% between 1995 and 2005, when 
750 000 visits were recorded in a two-week period (15). According to a national 
survey in China, the number of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) visits was 
907 million in 2009, which accounts for 18% of all medical visits to surveyed 
institutions; the number of TCM inpatients was 13.6 million, or 16% of the 
total in all hospitals surveyed (16). In the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
80% of the population lives in rural areas made up of a total of 9113 villages: 
each village has one or two traditional health practitioners. A total of 18 226 
traditional health practitioners provide a large part of health care service for 
80% of the population’s health (17). In Saudi Arabia, a recent study showed 
that individuals pay US$560 per annum out-of-pocket for T&CM services (18).
3.2 Use of T&CM
In order to build a knowledge-based T&CM policy, the following information 
must be obtained and analysed: why are people using it, when are people using 
it, what are the benefits, who is delivering it and what are their qualifications?
Global review of T&CM

[page 28]
27
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
3.2.1 Why are people using T&CM?
Patterns of use of T&CM vary among and within Member States depending 
on a number of factors such as culture, historical significance and regulations. 
While there is no uniform way to examine patterns of use, it may be helpful to 
consider how people use T&CM in terms of three general patterns: 
1) Use in countries where TM is one of the primary sources of health care. 
It is typical of these countries that the availability and/or accessibility of 
conventional medicine-based health services is, on the whole, limited. 
The widespread use of TM in Africa and some developing countries can 
be attributed to its being present on the ground and readily affordable. 
For instance, the ratio of traditional healers to population in Africa is 
1:500 whereas the ratio of medical doctors to population is 1:40 000. 
For millions of people in rural areas, native healers therefore remain 
their health providers (19).
2) Use of TM due to cultural and historical influences. In some countries 
such as Singapore and the Republic of Korea where the conventional 
health-care system is quite well established, 76% and 86% of the 
respective populations still commonly use TM (13).
3) Use of T&CM as complementary therapy. This is common in developed 
countries where the health system structure is typically well developed, 
e.g. North America and many European countries. 
Although there are common themes underlying the reasons which motivate 
people to use T&CM, there are also many differences between individual 
countries and regions. Some studies have shown that individuals choose T&CM 
for various reasons, including an increased demand for all health services, a 
desire for more information leading to an increased awareness of available 
options, an increasing dissatisfaction with existing health-care services, and a 
rekindled interest in “whole person care” and disease prevention which are 
more often associated with T&CM. In addition, T&CM recognizes the need to 
focus on quality of life when a cure is not possible (20). It has been shown, 
for instance, that patients attend the Royal London Hospital for Integrated 
Medicine because other treatments have failed, because that is their personal 
or cultural preference, or because they have experienced adverse effects with 
other treatments (21). In Australia, interviews with T&CM users also showed

[page 29]
28
that the failure of conventional medicine treatments and a desire for a healthy 
lifestyle were the main motives for using T&CM (22). 
In the last decade, across all types of utilization patterns, there has been an 
increase in self-health care as consumers choose to be more proactive about 
their own health. Many consumers turn to T&CM products and practices on 
the assumption that “natural means safe” (23), which is not necessarily true.
 
3.2.2 When are people using T&CM?
Individual needs often determine when people use T&CM. A number of 
studies show that patients with specific chronic conditions use T&CM services 
more often. For example, a study in the United States showed that patients 
with musculoskeletal complaints who visited osteopathic physicians in family 
practice settings accounted for 23% of all visits during a one-year period 
(24). In France, chronic musculoskeletal disorder patients made up a greater 
proportion of visits to physicians who offered alternatives to conventional 
medicine (25). An extensive number of patients with multiple sclerosis resort 
to complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments: prevalence of 
use ranges from 41% in Spain to 70% in Canada and 82% in Australia (26). 
In China, based on data from the national monitoring of TCM services, the 
top five diseases for admission to TCM hospitals in 2008 were: cerebrovascular 
accident, intervertebral disc displacement, haemorrhoids, ischaemic heart 
disease and essential hypertension (27). The Republic of Korea reported that 
the top diseases for admission to Korean medicine hospitals in 2011 were 
bone, joint and muscle system disorders, dyspepsia, osteoarthritis of the knee 
and facial nerve disorders
1.
In many developing countries, TM plays an important role in meeting the 
primary health care needs of the population, and specific types of TM have 
been used for a long time (28). Box 2 below shows an example of TM use for 
primary health care.
Global review of T&CM
1 Communication with WHO from the Government of the Republic of Korea, Ministry of Health and Welfare,

[page 30]
29
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Box 2: Mongolian TM family medicines kit
In the challenging geography of Mongolia’s mountains and deserts, nomadic 
herdsmen often struggle to reach a district hospital. A family traditional 
medicine kit project was started in 2004 and covers more than 150 000 
people. The survey reported that 74% of respondents said that the kits were 
convenient to use, and the medicines had been effective when used with a 
user manual. The medicines used cost approximately US$8 per family per 
year (29).
3.2.3 Benefits of using T&CM 
Potential cost savings are an important reason for individuals to opt for T&CM 
services. For example, a randomized controlled trial included an economic 
evaluation of physiotherapy, manual therapy, and general practitioner care 
for neck pain: results showed that the manual therapy group improved faster 
than the physiotherapy and general practitioner care group, and that the 
total costs of manual therapy (€447) were about one third of the costs of 
physiotherapy (€1297) and general practitioner care (€1379). This suggests 
that manual therapy is more effective and less costly for treating neck pain 
than physiotherapy or care provided by a general practitioner (30). Another 
recent study indicates that patients whose general practitioner has additional 
complementary and alternative medicine training have lower health care costs 
and mortality rates than those who do not. Reduced costs were the outcome 
of fewer hospital stays and fewer prescription drugs (31).
 
3.2.4. Types and qualifications of T&CM practitioners
T&CM practitioners can be TM practitioners, CM practitioners, conventional 
doctors or other health professionals. Differing approaches to regulation make 
it difficult to determine the absolute numbers of practitioners worldwide. In 
many developing countries, particularly in rural areas, TM practitioners are the 
main or sole providers of health care in their community. In other countries, 
TM practitioners can be divided into a number of categories based on their 
training/education, registration status, etc. For example, in India there are 
two categories of TM practitioners, with 785 185 registered Ayurveda, Yoga

[page 31]
30
and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) practitioners (32) 
and an estimated one million village-based, traditional AYUSH community 
health workers (33). Findings from the CAMbrella project also indicate 
that T&CM provision in the European Union stems from approximately 
160 000 non-medical practitioners and 145 000 medical practitioners (34).
The education/training of T&CM providers differs between countries. Some 
countries conduct T&CM education and training programmes within the 
health professional syllabus at university level. Others have well-established 
education and training that addressed a specific type of T&CM. Box 3 shows 
an example of the TM education system in India.
Box 3: Education system for TM practitioners
 in India
In India, all six traditional systems of medicine with official recognition 
(Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani Medicine, Siddha and Homeopathy) 
have institutionalised education systems. India has 508 colleges with an 
annual admission capacity of 25 586 undergraduate students, 117 of these 
colleges also admitting 2493 postgraduate students. Colleges can only 
be established with the permission of central government and the prior 
approval of their infrastructure, syllabi and course curricula. Annual and 
surprise inspections ensure that educational and infrastructural standards 
are met. Central Government has the power to recognize or rescind any 
qualification and college
1.
3.3 Regulation of T&CM products, practices and 
practitioners 
As a result of the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005, national and 
regional policies and regulations have been established to promote the safe use 
of T&CM products, practices and practitioners (Box 4) in many Member States. 
It remains a key responsibility of Member States to protect the health of their 
populations by ensuring the safety of T&CM practice and managing its described 
risks more effectively (Box 5). Differences between countries are apparent in 
the type of supervisory structures put in place by governments in order to 
develop policies and regulate T&CM products, practices and practitioners 
while being mindful of the need for consumer choice and protection. Since 
Global review of T&CM
1 Communication with WHO from the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2013.

[page 32]
31
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
T&CM is diversely perceived and assessed in different countries, it is hardly 
surprising, given their different national priorities, legislation and resources, 
that Member States will choose to protect the health of their populations in 
very different ways.
Box 4: T&CM products, practices and practitioners
T&CM products include herbs, herbal materials, herbal preparations and 
finished herbal products that contain parts of plants, other plant materials 
or combinations thereof as active ingredients. In some countries herbal 
medicines may contain, by tradition, natural organic or inorganic active 
ingredients that are not of plant origin (e.g. animal and mineral materials). 
(Ref.: modified questionnaire explanation in the second WHO Global Survey).
T&CM practices include medication therapy and procedure-based health 
care therapies such as herbal medicines, naturopathy, acupuncture 
and manual therapies such as chiropractic, osteopathy as well as other 
related techniques including qigong, tai chi, yoga, thermal medicine, and 
other physical, mental, spiritual and mind-body therapies. (Ref.: modified 
definition of procedure-based therapies in WHO General Guidelines for 
Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine).
T&CM practitioners can be TM practitioners, CM practitioners, conventional 
medicine professionals and health care workers such as doctors, dentists, 
nurses, midwives, pharmacists and physical therapists who provide TM/
CAM services to their patients (Ref.: modified questionnaire explanation in 
the second WHO Global Survey).
Box 5: Described risks associated with T&CM 
products, practitioners and self-care:
n Use of poor quality, adulterated or counterfeit products;
n Unqualified practitioners;
n Misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis, or failure to use effective conventional 
 treatments;
n Exposure to misleading or unreliable information;
n Direct adverse events, side effects or unwanted treatment interactions.

[page 33]
32
3.3.1 Products
At present, most Member States regulate herbal products, although they 
continue to develop, update and implement new regulations as needed. These 
regulatory approaches are aimed at protecting consumer health by ensuring 
that medicines are safe and of high quality. In view of the fact that this market 
is now truly international with products often being made in a country other 
than that in which they are sold, it may be a challenge to ensure products 
are safe and of high quality. In order to address this issue, Member States 
and regulatory agencies are increasingly cooperating and learning from each 
other’s experiences. Some regional bodies have been working on harmonizing 
regulations on herbal medicines and other herbal products within their region. 
For example, the goal in the European Union is to adopt a uniform legislation 
on T&CM products which can be prescribed or recommended by practitioners 
across the region (35); in the South-East Asian Region, efforts to harmonize 
the regulation of herbal medicines and other herbal products have been on-
going since 2004 (http://www.aseansec.org/18215.htm). An example of a 
global regulatory network supported by WHO is shown in Box 6.
Box 6: Global Regulatory Cooperation Network for 
Herbal Medicines (IRCH)
In recent years, there has been an increased focus on regional and international 
collaboration on regulating medicinal products. Herbal medicines have 
been a specific workshop topic at meetings of the International Conference 
of Drug Regulatory Authorities (ICDRA) since 1986. In the T&CM sector, 
national regulatory authorities responsible for the regulation of herbal 
medicines have been meeting annually since 2006 as part of the global 
regulatory network of the International Regulatory Cooperation on Herbal 
Medicine (IRCH).
3.3.2 T&CM practices
To ensure the safety and quality of T&CM, national health authorities must 
develop policies and strategies that reflect their specific needs in dealing 
with the most popular forms of T&CM practised in their country. In addition, 
in recognition of the fact that T&CM is truly global, they must be prepared 
to deal with new forms of T&CM being introduced from other countries. 
This may make it difficult to identify qualified T&CM practices. Accordingly, 
when Member States formulate and implement national policies and T&CM 
Global review of T&CM

[page 34]
33
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
regulations, it may be useful to consider the experience and information of 
other countries. For instance, in Singapore, licensing bodies for acupuncture 
and TCM recognise certification and qualifications obtained at accredited 
overseas sites and centres of higher learning (36). A similar situation exists in 
Thailand, where licences for the practice of T&CM are granted to those with a 
bachelor’s degree in T&CM from universities in Thailand or abroad (37).
 
 
3.3.3 T&CM practitioners
The knowledge and qualification of practitioners have a direct bearing on 
patient safety. The ways in which T&CM practitioners obtain their knowledge 
and skills vary between countries. In some countries, some T&CM practices 
have become established and practitioners are required to complete an official 
education/training programme. For instance, in many European countries and in 
North America, chiropractic, naturopathic, herbal and osteopathy practitioners 
must be educated in university-level programmes. Similarly, in China, the 
Republic of Korea, India and Vietnam, doctors practising specific types of 
T&CM must graduate from university. In addition to education/training, many 
Member States have drawn up regulations for T&CM practitioners. 
However, in many developing countries, TM knowledge and skills have 
been transferred from generation to generation orally, making it difficult to 
identify qualified practitioners. Member States should consider their own 
situation, and identify their specific needs. These may include upgrading their 
knowledge base and skills, supporting collaboration between TM practitioners 
and conventional health care providers and, where necessary, considering 
regulation or registration of practices. The number of Member States with 
established regulations on T&CM practitioners can be seen in Figure 5 while 
an example of T&CM practitioner regulation is given in Box 7.

[page 35]
34
Box 7: Current regulation of Chinese Medicine 
Practitioners in Hong Kong, SAR, China
The Chinese Medicine Ordinance (CMO) (http://www.legislation.gov.hk/
eng/home.htm) was enacted in 1999 (Cap 549) to regulate the practice, 
use, trading and manufacture of Chinese medicine under the aegis of the 
Chinese Medicine Council of Hong Kong (CMCHK). Under the CMO, any 
person with a recognised undergraduate degree of training in Chinese 
medicine who wishes to be registered must pass the licensing examination 
conducted by the Chinese Medicine Practitioners Board (PB) maintained by 
the CMCHK. Since Chinese medicine practice has a long history in Hong 
Kong, the CMO provided for a transitional arrangement for the registration 
of Chinese medicine practitioners (CMP). Any person practising Chinese 
medicine in Hong Kong on 3 January 2000 may apply to the PB to be listed as 
a CMP . A registered CMP must then apply for a certificate of practice which 
is valid for three years, and must meet continuing education requirements in 
Chinese medicine before being able to renew their certificate of practice. A 
limited registration system for CMPs requires Chinese medicine experts to 
undertake clinical teaching and research in the institutions approved by the 
PB. In order to regulate their professional conduct and practice, the PB has 
compiled codes of conduct for CMPs (38).
Global review of T&CM
3.3.4 Intellectual property
Issues related to intellectual property (IP) can have an impact on products, 
practices and even practitioners. While IP may support innovation and provide 
With regulations on T&CM
practitioners
With no regulations
on T&CM practitioners
Not
answered
56
(43.5%)
56
(43.5%)
17
(13%)
Figure 5: Regulations on T&CM pratitioners
Source: Interim data from 2nd WHO TRM global survey as of 11 June 2012.
129

[page 36]
35
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
a stimulus to invest in research, it can also be abused to misappropriate T&CM. 
A joint publication by WHO, WIPO and WTO (39) discusses current policy issues 
regarding IP , traditional knowledge and genetic resources, of which T&CM is 
an integral part.
3.4 Universal health coverage and integration of 
T&CM
At the 65 th World Health Assembly, the WHO Director-General stated that 
“universal health coverage is the best way to cement the gains made during 
the previous decade. It is the ultimate expression of fairness. This is the anchor 
for the work of WHO as we [WHO] move forward” (40). In addition, achieving 
universal health coverage (UHC) has been set as one of the overarching goals 
in WHO’s 12
th General Programme of Work 2014–2019 (41).
The purpose of UHC is to ensure that all people have access to promotive, 
preventive, curative and rehabilitative health services, of sufficient quality to 
be effective, while also ensuring that they do not suffer financial hardship 
when paying for these services. Universal health coverage is closely connected 
to achieving the “highest attainable standard of health” outlined in WHO’s 
Constitution and in the concept of Health For All. Many factors inside and 
outside the health system contribute to achieving UHC: socioeconomic 
determinants external to health systems, and health system improvements 
such as good governance, increased availability and appropriate distribution 
of appropriate types of health workers, availability and distribution of essential 
medicines and health facilities, high quality of care, appropriate financing, 
reliable information, etc.
The path to universal health coverage must overcome existing barriers facing 
individuals when accessing health-care services such as the fragmentation of 
health-care services and their lack of patient-centredness. Health services may 
be too distant (geographical barrier), or poorly staffed with long waiting hours 
(organizational barrier), or not coherent with people’s cultural and gender 
preferences (cultural barrier). Moreover, even when the population is able to 
access services, they may be of poor quality or, in some cases, even harmful. 
Another paramount problem is the predominance of curative, hospital-based, 
disease-oriented services, which are often poorly integrated into the broader 
health system. These top-heavy services are responsible for huge inefficiencies

[page 37]
36
that could be redirected towards achieving universal coverage. Instead of these 
existing barriers, qualified T&CM could be a positive contribution to universal 
health coverage. 
In many countries, T&CM has been partially covered by public and private 
insurance companies since the 1990s. The number of Member States 
with insurance coverage for acupuncture can be seen in Figure 2. In many 
European countries, however, T&CM regulation and registration are not 
well established. An increasing number of medical doctors are interested 
in T&CM in these European countries, a phenomenon which may increase 
the likelihood of reimbursement. For example, many French doctors are 
specialists in acupuncture and homeopathy, both of which are reimbursed by 
the Social Security when performed or prescribed by a doctor. Since 1997, 
the Socialist Mutual Insurance of Tournai-Ath in Belgium partially reimburses 
specific complementary/alternative treatments such as homeopathic remedies. 
In Finland, when provided by an allopathic physician, acupuncture and other 
complementary/alternative therapies can be covered by the Social Insurance 
Institution (SII). In Germany, public and private insurance provides the same 
kind of coverage for some complementary/alternative treatments (42). An 
example of insurance reimbursement for TM services in Japan is illustrated in 
Box 8.
Box 8: TM legislation and national health insurance 
reimbursement in Japan
In Japan, 84% of Japanese physicians use kampo in daily practice (43). 
According to the Annual Health, Labour and Welfare Report 2011–2012 
(44), the number of registered medical doctors who are sole prescribers of 
kampo medicines is 295 049. There were 276 517 registered pharmacists 
who are sole dispensers of kampo medicines. There were also 92 421 
acupuncturists, 90 664 moxacauterists, 104 663 massage practitioners 
and 50 428 judotherapists. As of April 2000, the National Health Insurance 
Reimbursement List included 147 prescription kampo formulae and 192 
herbal materials used in prescription kampo formulae. Acupuncture, 
moxibustion, Japanese traditional massage, and judotherapy are partially 
covered by private health insurance (42).
Global review of T&CM

[page 38]
37
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
3.4.1 Different stages of T&CM integration
Given that T&CM has the potential to improve individual health, its proper 
integration into national health systems will enable consumers to have a wider 
choice when they wish to use such services. Though integration may be of 
the greatest relevance to populations living with chronic disease or in health 
promotion, in certain circumstances it may contribute to the treatment of acute 
disease. Appropriate integration has also been addressed by Dr Margaret Chan, 
Director-General of WHO, who stated that: “The two systems of traditional 
and Western medicine need not clash. Within the context of primary health 
care, they can blend together in a beneficial harmony, using the best features 
of each system, and compensating for certain weaknesses in each. This is not 
something that will happen all by itself. Deliberate policy decisions have to be 
made. But it can be done successfully” (45). 
In a few countries, certain types of T&CM have been completely integrated 
into the health care system. In China, for instance, traditional Chinese medicine 
and conventional medicine are practised alongside each other at every level of 
the health-care service and public and private insurance cover both traditional 
Chinese medicine and conventional medicine (Box 9).
Box 9: TM health service integration in China 
In China, there are about 440 700 health-care institutions providing TM 
services, with 520 600 patient beds, including all levels of TM hospitals and 
general hospitals, clinics and health stations in urban and rural areas. About 
90% of general hospitals include a TM department and provide TM services 
for both outpatients and inpatients. TM medical institutions are governed 
by the same national legislation on medical institutions as conventional 
medical institutions. TM practitioners are allowed to practice in both public 
and private clinics and hospitals. Government and private insurance fully 
cover TM including Tibetan, Mongolian, Uygur and Dai traditional medicine. 
Public or patients are free to choose TM or conventional medicine for health-
care services, or their doctors can provide advice on which therapies may 
be better suited to their health problems (46).
In the Republic of Korea, traditional medicine doctors can provide Korean TM 
in both public and private hospitals and clinics. A national medical insurance 
programme has covered Korean TM services since 1987 and currently private

[page 39]
38
insurance also covers TM services. In Viet Nam, TM practitioners are able 
to practise in both public and private hospitals and clinics and government 
insurance fully covers acupuncture, herbal medicines and TM treatment. 
In many other countries, T&CM is partially integrated into the national health 
system. Switzerland became the first country in Europe to integrate T&CM 
into its health system (Box 10).
 
Box 10: T&CM integration into the Swiss health-
care system 
In Switzerland, the average prevalence of T&CM use (persons who have 
used T&CM) was 49% (47) after 1990. In 1998, the Federal Department of 
Home Affairs (DHA) decided that, from 1999 to 2005, five complementary 
therapies – anthroposophical medicine, homeopathy, neural therapy, 
phytotherapy and TCM (more precisely, traditional Chinese herbal therapy) 
– would be covered by the compulsory health insurance program (KLV), if 
the service was provided by a physician certified in CAM. Meanwhile, the 
Swiss government also set up a comprehensive programme to evaluate 
CAM (PEK), which was playing an ever-increasing role in the Swiss medical 
system, in order to determine its role and effectiveness.
 
According to the PEK evaluation result, CAM practitioners can be 
distinguished from physicians providing conventional health care in respect 
of the nature, location and technical resources of their practice. In 2009, 
more than 67% of national voters opted for a new constitutional article 
on CAM, with the result that certain complementary therapies have been 
re-instated into the basic health insurance scheme available to all Swiss 
citizens (48). The constitutional article on CAM is also likely to speed up 
compulsory lessons for medical students, standardization of training and 
certification in complementary therapies for both doctors and non-medical 
practitioners, and the availability of CAM products in Switzerland (49).
3.4.2 How to integrate T&CM
When integrating T&CM into the health care system, the process and steps 
taken will vary from country to country and region to region. The following 
criteria may help Member States identify the key processes that need to be 
undertaken in their countries:
Global review of T&CM

[page 40]
39
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
n surveying T&CM use including benefits and risks in the context of local 
history and culture and promoting a keener appreciation of the role and 
potential of T&CM;
n analysing national health resources such as finance and human resources 
for health; 
n strengthening or establishing all relevant policy and regulations for T&CM 
products, practices and practitioners;
n promoting equitable access to health and integration of T&CM into the 
national health system including reimbursement, and potential referral and 
collaborative pathways.
It is important to consider the importance of each practice in the national 
context when developing an integration policy. Emphasis should be placed 
on the importance of documenting and studying T&CM practice in order to 
categorize T&CM therapies or modalities that will underpin appropriate policies 
and regulations. In Sweden, a number of lessons and recommendations were 
learned from the integration of T&CM in primary care and some important 
issues were highlighted (50): e.g. the availability of specialist training for 
general practitioners, preferably computer-based documentation reflecting 
multi-modular management, combination of qualitative and quantitative 
research methods, interdisciplinary dialogue and collaboration.
A knowledge-based policy is the key to integrate T&CM into national health 
systems. Research should be prioritized and supported in order to generate 
knowledge. While there is much to be learned from controlled clinical trials, 
other evaluation methods are also valuable. These include outcome and 
effectiveness studies, as well as comparative effectiveness research, patterns of 
use, and other qualitative methods. There is an opportunity to take advantage 
of, and sponsor such “real world experiments” where different research 
designs and methods are important, valuable and applicable. The importance 
of embracing various kinds of contributory research methods and designs in 
the effort to build a broad evidence base to inform national policy and decision 
making has been underlined by the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE), as well as others (51).

[page 41]
40
3.5 Opportunities and challenges
It is clear from the global review that there are a number of opportunities and 
challenges in relation to national policies, law and regulation, quality, safety 
and effectiveness of T&CM, universal health coverage and the integration 
of T&CM into health systems. Although there are many pressing social and 
economic issues that serve as an incentive for using T&CM, the predicted 
increase in the global burden of chronic diseases (WHO Global Status Report 
on noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), 2011) is the most urgent reason for 
developing and strengthening collaboration between conventional and T&CM 
health sectors. 
The opportunities and challenges identified in the review are reflected in 
Member States’ reports, surveys and expert meetings (summarized in Figures 
6 and 7). Altogether, these findings provide the basis for developing the 
objectives of this strategy. However, in view of the diversity among Member 
States about how T&CM is perceived, used, regulated and integrated, the 
implementation of strategic objectives must be considered in relation to each 
Member State’s specific situation.
Number of Member States
Lack of research data
Lack of ﬁnancial support for research on T&CM
Lack of mechanisms to control and regulate 
T&CM advertising and claims
Lack of appropriant mechanisms control and 
regulate herbal products
Lack of appropriant mechanisms to monitor 
and regulate T&CM providers
Lack of expertise within national health 
authorities and control agencies
Lack of mechanisms to monitor safety of 
T&CM practice 
Lack of cooperation channels between national health 
authorities to share informaiton about T&CM
Lack of mechanisms to monitor safety of T&CM 
products, including herbal medicines
Lack of education and training for T&CM providers
Other
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
105
83
78
75
68
67
65
63
60
58
15
Figure 6: Difficulties faced by Member States regarding 
regulatory issues related to the practices of T&CM
Source: Interim data from 2nd WHO TRM global survey as of 11 June 2012.
Global review of T&CM

[page 42]
41
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
The diversity among Member States is illustrated by the findings of a recent 
study on T&CM in Europe. The 39 nations involved in the study diverge to an 
extraordinary degree with regard to the regulation of CAM practice. At the 
same time, the stated policy aim is to adopt a uniform regulation for CAM 
products that are prescribed or recommended by practitioners within this same 
geographical area. When patients cross borders in search of CAM treatment, 
they may encounter substantial differences in the professional background of 
apparently identical CAM practitioners, who are subject to completely different 
reimbursement systems. This complicated situation influences rights, access 
and potential safety, and constitutes a challenge to a harmonized national and 
European adoption of the new directive on the application of patients’ rights 
in cross-border health care (52). As a consequence, individual states within 
culturally similar regions should consider harmonizing their complementary 
and alternative laws and regulations in order to safeguard against over- or 
underregulating at the national level where there is no reason to do so (35).
Figure 7: The type of support for T&CM issues that Member 
States are interested in receiving from WHO
Source: Interim data from 2nd WHO TRM global survey as of 11 June 2012.
Number of Member States
Technical guidance on research and evaluation of 
T&CM safety, quality and efﬁcacy
Seminar/workshop about integration of T&CM in 
the PHC context
National capacity building seminar/workshop on 
safety monitoring of herbal medicines
National capacity building seminar/workshop on 
regulations on T&CM practice
Seminar/workshop on developing national policy 
and programmes for T&CM
National capacity building seminar/workshop on 
regulations for herbal medicines
Provision of guidelines or minimum requirements 
for basic training of T&CM providers
Arrangement of global meetings
Provision of technical support to promote safe and 
effective use of inidgenous TM in PHC
Provision of cooperation channels between national 
health authorities
Provision of guidance on self-care, information for the 
public in PHC or at community level
Provision of research databases
Information sharing on regulatory issues
Other
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
65 29 7
6
9
58 39
55 33
55 29 10
54 35 8
54 34 17
51 32 19
51 28 17
50 36 11
47 37 7
45 39 14
38 37 12
29 49 10
11 5
Great need
Some need
No need

[page 43]
42
In general, data reported by Member States show that progress in matters 
related to the regulation of T&CM products, practices and practitioners is not 
occurring at an equal pace. Progress relating to regulation on herbal medicines 
and national T&CM policies is moving faster, while regulation on T&CM 
practitioners and practice creeps forward at a slower rate. As an example, the 
Figure 2 shows that although majority of reported MS acknowledged the use 
of acupuncture there are much less MS acknowledged the establishment of 
regulation on acupuncture. Responding to the needs identified by Member 
States and building upon the work completed in the WHO Traditional Medicine 
Strategy 2002–2005, this new WHO TM strategy will devote more attention to 
prioritizing health services and systems than its predecessor.
Analysis of progress since the first WHO global strategy for TM (Section 2), and 
the Global Review (Section 3) make it clear that there is continuing demand for 
T&CM around the world. T&CM is used not only to treat diseases, especially 
chronic diseases; it is also widely used in disease prevention, health promotion 
and health maintenance, and it has proved to be cost-effective for some 
governments. In order to meet the demands of the public and Member States, 
and to help guide countries towards integration of T&CM into health systems, 
WHO has developed the Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014–2023. 
 
Global review of T&CM

[page 44]
43
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
4. Strategic objectives, strategic 
 directions and strategic actions 
In response to the successes and challenges identified during the implementation 
of the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005, WHO brought together 
and consulted with experts, Member States and other stakeholders across the 
six WHO regions to develop the strategic objectives, strategic directions and 
strategic actions for the new strategy to guide the T&CM sector from 2014–
2023. This section provides extensive detail on how T&CM should be further 
developed and advanced over the next decade.
WHO has recently indicated that significant strategic planning for Member 
States will focus on the need for better universal health coverage (UHC) 
around the world. WHO recognizes that good health is essential to sustained 
economic and social development and poverty reduction. Access to essential 
health services is crucial for maintaining and improving health. At the same 
time, people need to be protected from being pushed into poverty because of 
the cost of health care.
The goals for the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014–2023 are to support 
Member States in:
 
1. harnessing the potential contribution of T&CM to health, wellness, people-
centred health care and UHC;
2. promoting safe and effective use of T&CM through the regulation, research 
and integration of T&CM products, practices and practitioners into the 
health system, as appropriate.
The WHO TM strategy 2014–2023 is designed to help countries determine 
how best they can both promote health and protect consumers who wish to 
avail themselves of these products, practices and practitioners. This involves 
two key steps:
1. Member States should define and better understand T&CM within their 
own national situation by identifying the forms of T&CM used, defining 
who uses them, exploring the reasons for their use and determining both

[page 45]
44
present and future needs. In essence, countries must build their own 
national profile around T&CM. 
2. reflecting on their national profile, Member States should develop policies, 
regulations and guidelines that address those forms of T&CM which meet 
the health needs and choices of their people. While common themes and 
priorities may exist between Member States, national approaches must 
be developed to address individual countries’ needs. Clearly they will be 
subject to existing legal frameworks, cultural beliefs about T&CM, and 
structures to supervise individual products, practices and practitioners. 
Member States can achieve these two key steps by organizing their activities 
towards three strategic objectives:
1) to build the knowledge base for active management of T&CM through 
appropriate national policies;
2) to strengthen quality assurance, safety, proper use and effectiveness of 
T&CM by regulating products, practices and practitioners;
3) to promote universal health coverage by integrating T&CM services 
appropriately into health service delivery and self-health care.
4.1 Strategic objective 1: To build the knowledge 
base for active management of T&CM through 
appropriate national policies
There is a great diversity of products, practices and practitioners in T&CM. 
Some confer health benefits, others are associated with risks or are purely 
commercially driven. In view of their limited resources, Member States should 
decide where to focus their attention so as to provide consumers with the 
best and safest form of health care, while addressing the need to uphold 
consumer choice. Before an informed decision can be made about how T&CM 
is to be supervised within their jurisdiction, Member States must understand 
the specific nature of their national T&CM sector and establish valid and 
comprehensive baseline data from which to build. 
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 46]
45
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
4.1.1 Strategic direction 1: Understand and recognize the role and 
potential of T&CM
Member States are encouraged to acknowledge the role T&CM plays in their 
health-care system. However, there is enormous diversity in the varieties of 
T&CM that may be considered to be a constituent part of each local health 
care system. The strategy recommends that Member States acknowledge and 
appraise, in detail, which types of T&CM are being used by their population 
and devise their own country profile for T&CM practice. This information will 
enable them to make informed policy decisions on how to regulate and use 
T&CM appropriately. 
As the marketplace for T&CM becomes more global, harmonization and 
cooperation will increase in value. In this environment, policies and regulation 
with a national and global perspective ought to be developed. The strategy 
plan recommends that countries use best-practice approaches in order to 
develop regulations for different modalities. 
Strategic actions for Member States:
1. Acknowledge the role and diversity of T&CM within their health-care 
system.
2. Define the scope of the sector through the use of data identifying the 
number of people using specific forms of T&CM, their reasons for using 
it, the most popular (important) forms, whether use follows advice from 
a health professional, and whether health-care professionals know about 
patients’ use of T&CM.
3. Implement and integrate T&CM policies and programmes as integral 
components of their national health system, where appropriate. 
4. Foster communication and partnership between stakeholders.
5. Prioritize and determine actions to be taken in line with national priorities, 
capabilities, etc.
Strategic actions for partners and stakeholders:
1. Establish best practices in cooperation with accredited bodies of practitioners 
and researchers which can be shared internationally.
2. Make recommendations concerning research priorities in specific areas for 
policy formulation.

[page 47]
46
Strategic actions for WHO:
1. Continue to provide support and technical guidance to Member States by 
developing relevant documents and tools for policy studies.
2. Support Member States in defining and regulating the different disciplines 
and modalities of T&CM.
3. Coordinate global technical resources to build consensus about the basic 
definitions of T&CM.
4. Support Member States in promoting information sharing among countries 
on policy formulation.
5. Collect global data on T&CM utilization; establish and maintain a database 
to collect information on T&CM policy and regulation by Member States.
4.1.2 Strategic direction 2: Strengthen the knowledge base, build 
evidence and sustain resources
Member States should strengthen their own knowledge generation, 
collaboration and sustainable use of T&CM resources. It is important that 
Member States and stakeholders are mindful of biodiversity and international 
treaties concerning endangered species. 
While there is a growing interest in T&CM, there are still many questions about 
the quality and quantity of evidence which supports its utilization. T&CM 
research should use methods which are generally accepted in the evaluation 
of health services, including comparative effectiveness studies and mixed-
method designs. There is also a dearth of research and innovation into the 
various forms of T&CM. In order for T&CM to be considered an integral part of 
health care, it must be supported by evidence. This can be achieved by greater 
research and innovation accompanied by a focus on knowledge management, 
including intellectual property protection rights. This, in turn, is likely to 
encourage innovation and protect traditional knowledge. Although T&CM is 
now a popular global phenomenon, there is still a risk that the traditional 
knowledge for maintaining health and providing health care to people in 
some countries might be lost. This should be brought to the attention of the 
appropriate intellectual property agencies.
A key priority is the strategic gathering, analysis and synthesis of data on 
T&CM use, coupled with an information management strategy to ensure it 
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 48]
47
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
remains current and of the highest quality. This may be done by including 
questions about T&CM uptake in national surveys, adopting existing databases, 
establishing research centres of excellence or developing national research and 
multi-stakeholder networks.
Once the basic data has been acquired, Member States need to encourage 
research into forms of T&CM which may benefit their populations and focus 
their attention and limited resources on the products, practices and practitioners 
most likely to be of benefit. At the same time, Member States should be better 
placed to identify types of T&CM that make exaggerated claims or pose an 
actual health risk.
Adequate protection of T&CM through conventional intellectual property or 
sui generis rights can help prevent its unauthorized use. Current intellectual 
property frameworks may be used to protect innovations based on T&CM and 
be extended to include appropriate safeguards to prevent the misappropriation 
of T&CM. Any new sui generis protection system ought not only to ensure 
prior informed consent and access and benefit sharing, but also to provide for 
widespread access to T&CM, while encouraging research on T&CM quality, 
safety and efficacy in order to adapt existing treatments and develop new 
products. Appropriate strategies can also ensure that third parties do not gain 
illegitimate or unfounded intellectual property rights over T&CM.
Strategic actions for Member States:
1. Based on the greatest potential risks and/or benefits attributable to T&CM 
used in their country:
a. monitor the safety of T&CM;
b. identify sources of evidence, whether historical, traditional or 
scientific, which support or invalidate a particular therapy;
c. determine the risk/benefit profile, including cost-effectiveness.
2. Promote research and development, innovation, knowledge management.
3. Encourage knowledge generation, translation and dissemination by 
establishing a comprehensive and inclusive approach to T&CM research 
and development including into quality and cost-effectiveness.
4. Develop a national research agenda which acknowledges and includes 
various types of research models where appropriate.

[page 49]
48
5. Develop and share appropriate methods and criteria for evaluating the 
safety, efficacy and quality of T&CM products and for assessing the value of 
T&CM practice (e.g., develop resources for research, develop appropriate 
research methodologies, and encourage investment).
6. Prevent the misappropriation of T&CM by implementing the relevant 
international instruments in line with the WHO global strategy and plan 
of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property, adopting 
or amending national intellectual property legislation, and enacting other 
defensive protection strategies.
7. Protect and conserve T&CM resources, in particular knowledge and natural 
resources. 
8. Identify how T&CM information is communicated through practitioners, 
product advertising, practices and the media.
9. Foster dialogue and partnership between stakeholders. Where relevant to 
the national need, seek input from international partners with additional 
information especially concerning global trends and lessons learned.
10. Publish standard treatment guidelines for use of T&CM, as well as a list of 
essential herbal medicines.
Strategic actions for partners and stakeholders:
1. Support collaboration with Member States and WHO in research projects/
programmes on T&CM.
2. Advise on assessing risks and benefits.
3. Foster a culture of communication, documentation, evaluation and 
innovation among practitioner communities, both nationally and 
internationally.
4. Increase the availability and awareness of the literature, database and other 
knowledge repositories.
5. Develop research methodologies consistent with T&CM theories and 
practice. 
6. Build up the capacity and capability for international research, including 
such issues as the adequate protection of intellectual property and the 
prevention of possible misappropriation.
7. Support international research collaboration on T&CM.
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 50]
49
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Strategic actions for WHO:
1. Continue to provide support and technical guidance to Member States by developing 
relevant documents and tools regarding policy studies, research, resource preservation 
and sustainable use.
2. Promote international collaboration on T&CM research.
3. Raise awareness of all stakeholders about issues of biodiversity and conservation.
4. Organize training workshops on policy formulation, research methodology, research 
ethics and resource preservation.
5. Collect and disseminate relevant information.
4.2 Strategic objective 2: To strengthen quality assurance, 
safety, proper use and effectiveness of T&CM by regulating 
T&CM products, practices and practitioners
Member States should examine the potential of T&CM practices and products in their region 
and country, and then consider whether they need additional regulations, supervision, 
systems or institutions to make the quality assurance, safety and effectiveness of T&CM 
practices and products more credible, while addressing the need for consumer choice.
Once a national agenda and the general policy have been established, regulatory 
frameworks for both products and practices should be developed to reflect specific 
regional and national needs. This process ought to include governments, consumers, 
educators, practitioner groups, manufacturers and researchers, and should seek to define 
how T&CM is practised and how T&CM products can be safely and effectively used. At 
the same time, it will enable health system planners to anticipate needs more effectively 
and to exploit the potential of T&CM methods to meet those health needs. 
4.2.1 Strategic direction 1: Recognize the role and importance of product 
regulation
Information from the first WHO Global Survey of T&CM and provisional information from 
the second WHO Global Survey indicates that Member States are increasingly developing 
and implementing regulatory frameworks for T&CM products. 
Though regulatory frameworks are developed at a national and regional level, countries 
are encouraged to recognise the global nature of this sector. T&CM is now an international

[page 51]
50
phenomenon with practices and products often being used in a different 
part of the world from that in which they were originally developed or 
manufactured. Global trade in these products, including their Internet-based 
supply has become an important factor in considering how to ensure that 
T&CM complies with international treaties on biodiversity and endangered 
species. This raises a number 
of challenges: dealing with different legislative 
frameworks between different countries, ensuring that information on quality and 
safety is shared and encouraging appropriate use within different cultures.
Strategic actions for Member States:
1. Identify existing standards, policies and regulations to ensure product 
quality and safety. Assess needs and prioritize areas requiring regulation 
based on risk assessment and while attempting to protect consumer 
choice.
2. Increase credibility and accessibility by developing and implementing 
appropriate regulatory frameworks to ensure the safe use of T&CM 
products.
3. Make provision for a basic regulatory framework that underpins quality, 
safety and effectiveness. Elements can include registering products, 
licensing providers and empowering regulators to implement public health 
measures, e.g. adverse event reporting.
4. Guarantee the regulatory capacity and resources to respond to market 
needs.
5. Disseminate evidence, guidelines and information which support health 
claims.
6. Encourage stakeholder awareness of and involvement in regulatory 
frameworks (including industrial actors, practitioner communities, 
researchers and consumers).
7. Set or adopt standards for T&CM products.
8. Promote international regulatory cooperation and collaboration including 
information sharing about T&CM products.
Strategic actions for partners and stakeholders:
1. Encourage practitioner communities, industry, researchers and consumers 
to become involved in devising regulations for products.
2. Cooperate and participate in monitoring and surveillance systems for risk 
management.
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 52]
51
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Strategic actions for WHO:
1. Develop or update WHO technical documents and tools on promoting 
safety, quality and effective use of T&CM products as well as applicable 
norms and standards.
2. Organize training workshops on capacity building for regulators.
3. Promote the international standardization and classification of T&CM.
4. Facilitate information sharing and international regulatory network 
development.
4.2.2 Strategic direction 2: Recognize and develop practice and 
practitioner regulations for T&CM education and training, skills 
development, services and therapies
As more countries develop policies and regulatory frameworks on T&CM, 
there is a need to evaluate their effectiveness and identify ways in which 
challenges can be addressed by comparison with appropriate reference 
standards (benchmarking). This can be accomplished both through national 
audits and reviews as well as by developing and sharing appropriate models at 
the international level. 
Benchmarks are of use in developing approaches and frameworks and 
evaluating how existing systems might be improved. They can be applied to 
evaluating individual therapies, developing reimbursement models, creating 
standards of practice, establishing regulatory frameworks for T&CM providers 
and practices, providing supervision of practitioners including training, 
accreditation and remuneration, and determining how a service is delivered 
within a health-care system.
Strategic actions for Member States:
1. Improve access to information and increase the knowledge base on the 
quality, safety and effectiveness of T&CM. 
2. Ensure appropriate supervision of T&CM services (practices and 
practitioners) by establishing practical regulatory systems that are adapted 
to the infrastructure of Member States.
3. Set standards and indicators for monitoring performance as part of a 
comprehensive health system.

[page 53]
52
4. Support the development of a code of conduct to bolster ethical practice, 
in partnership with all relevant stakeholders.
5. Support the development and implementation of practice guidelines for 
ensuring the safety, quality and effectiveness of T&CM services. 
6. Establish provisions for the education, qualification, and accreditation or 
licensing of T&CM practices and practitioners based on needs and risk 
assessment.
7. Initiate the development of benchmarks, standards and regulations for 
education, training, accreditation and reimbursement for different forms 
of T&CM.
8. Establish formal channels of communication to facilitate education including 
continuing education and accreditation, licensing and registration of T&CM 
practitioners.
Strategic actions for partners and stakeholders:
1. Encourage consumers, practitioner communities and researchers to 
become actively involved in setting standards for and regulating training, 
services and therapies.
2. Support the development of guidelines and a code of conduct for the 
ethical sponsorship of education, training and practice of TM practitioners. 
3. Encourage communication and knowledge sharing between practitioners 
in order to document and evaluate their practice.
4. Foster cohesiveness among traditional health practitioners and empower 
them to organize into associations or groups.
5. Encourage and promote accreditation of education and training institutes.
6. Promote mutual understanding and respect between T&CM practitioners 
and other health practitioners.
7. Encourage conventional health care professionals to know more about the 
use of T&CM.
Strategic actions for WHO:
1. Develop or update WHO technical documents and tools on promoting 
the safety, quality and effectiveness of T&CM practice and practitioners, 
including benchmarks for training and practice.
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 54]
53
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
2. Organize training workshops on capacity building for regulators.
3. Facilitate information sharing and the development of an international 
network of regulators.
4.3 Strategic objective 3: To promote universal 
health coverage by integrating T&CM services into 
health care service delivery and self-health care
It is increasingly recognised that safe and effective T&CM could contribute to the 
health of our populations. One of the most significant questions raised about 
T&CM in recent years is how it might contribute to universal health coverage 
by improving service delivery in the health system, particularly PHC: patient 
accessibility to health services, and greater awareness of health promotion and 
disease prevention are key issues here. Insurance coverage of T&CM products, 
practices and practitioners varies widely from full inclusion within insurance 
plans to total exclusion, with consumers having to pay for all T&CM out of 
pocket. Simultaneously, there is emerging evidence that T&CM, when included 
in UHC plans, may reduce pressure on the system and diminish costs. This 
shows why it is important for Member States to consider how to integrate 
T&CM into their health systems and UHC plans more comprehensively.
In order for T&CM to achieve its potential, individuals must be informed about 
the likely benefits and risks of supplementing their access to conventional 
medicine with T&CM. The T&CM community must become better at giving 
consumers more information about its products, practices and practitioners so 
they can make an informed choice. 
Member States should encourage cooperation and information sharing 
between conventional health care professionals and T&CM practitioners. 
Information which is easy to understand is the key to the safe and appropriate 
use of T&CM self-health care. This includes encouraging patients to inform 
their usual health care professionals about their use of T&CM products.

[page 55]
54
4.3.1 Strategic direction 1: Capitalize on the potential contribution 
of T&CM to improve health services and health outcomes 
Mindful of the traditions and customs of peoples and communities, Member 
States should consider how T&CM, including self-health care, might support 
disease prevention or treatment, health maintenance and health promotion 
consistent with 
evidence on quality, safety and effectiveness, in line with patient 
choice and expectations. 
Based on each country’s realities, models for integrating T&CM into national health 
systems should be explored. This includes deciding which forms of T&CM ought to 
be integrated, and how. If integration is not feasible, alternatives can be identified. 
Many initiatives are under way across the world: their goal is to develop 
models of best health care delivery which are sustainable, feasible and likely to 
improve health outcomes. Depending on the circumstances of the individual 
country, care may take the form of a single discipline, multiple disciplines, a 
self-health care model or adopt a more integrative approach. Often the best 
models are developed by partnerships and collaborations and will be people-
centred, relying on approaches that are safe, appropriate and cost-effective.
Strategic actions for Member States:
1. Recognize TM as a resource that could contribute to the improvement of 
health care services, particularly PHC, and that TM is relevant to improved 
health outcomes.
2. Explore how T&CM might be integrated into the national health service 
delivery system based on national capacities, priorities, relevant legislation 
and circumstances, and on evidence of safety, quality and effectiveness.
3. Encourage the development of appropriate health facilities for T&CM 
public health services by ensuring key health system elements are in place 
for integration.
4. Ensure equitable consideration for safe and effective T&CM in existing 
insurance coverage and in national health reimbursement models.
Strategic actions for partners and stakeholders:
1. Promote mutual respect, collaboration and understanding between 
conventional and T&CM practitioners.
2. Promote international communication among practitioner communities 
regarding integrative models.
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 56]
55
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
3. Promote research on the cost-effectiveness of integrating T&CM approaches.
4. Promote continuing education, evaluation, evidence and research into 
T&CM practices.
5. Involve nongovernmental organizations and the for-profit sector, including 
health reimbursement systems where appropriate, in the above objectives.
Strategic actions for WHO:
1. Develop or update WHO technical documents and tools on integrating 
T&CM into national health systems. This includes access to safe and 
qualified T&CM services, T&CM terminology and the inclusion of T&CM 
in the International Classification of Diseases. Support Member States in 
identifying models and approaches for integration of T&CM into health 
systems.
2. Organize education and training workshops for policy makers and T&CM 
practitioners.
3. Collect and disseminate information on integrating T&CM into national 
health systems.
4. Bring together T&CM professional associations and conventional medicine 
groups to promote the safe and effective use of the former.
4.3.2 Strategic direction 2: Ensure consumers of T&CM can make 
informed choices about self-health care
Informed choice is one of the cornerstones of good health care practice. Shared 
decision-making promotes people-centred care. Ethical and legal aspects 
should support and shape the key aspects and considerations of informed 
choice. Education should also play an important role in informed choice. In 
many Member States, self-selection of T&CM products account for a large part 
of the T&CM sector. 
It is important to note that consumers’ desire for accessibility and availability 
may conflict with a government’s mandate to protect its population by adopting 
the precautionary principle when risk is unclear. The way in which these two 
factors are kept in balance varies from country to country and may impinge on 
a self-health care model.

[page 57]
56
Strategic actions for Member States:
1. Develop mechanisms/guidelines for consumer education and protection, 
complaint channels and the proper use of T&CM products, practitioners 
and services, including their promotion and advertising. 
2. Strengthen interdisciplinary education and collaborative practice between 
conventional medicine practitioners and T&CM practitioners with a people-
centred emphasis.
3. Foster partnership and dialogue about self-health care among all 
stakeholders.
4. Encourage Member States to take steps to ensure consumers can make 
informed choices.
Strategic actions for partners and stakeholders:
1. Provide information and advice to consumers on T&CM including the 
potential risk of practices and products, including those obtained outside 
national regulatory controls (Internet-based purchase, etc.).
2. Promote health care practitioner education about T&CM, and encourage 
patients to declare their use of T&CM with conventional medicine 
practitioners.
3. Advocate responsible and accurate advertising and promotion.
Strategic actions for WHO:
1. Develop or update WHO documents and tools on consumer education and 
self-health care.
2. Organize education and training workshops for policy-makers and T&CM 
practitioners 
3. Collect and disseminate information about self-health care.
Strategic objectives, strategic directions and strategic actions

[page 58]
57
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
5. Implementing the Strategy
The goals for the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-2023 are to support 
Member States in: 
1. harnessing the potential contribution of T&CM to health, wellness and 
people-centred health care;
2. promoting safe and effective use of T&CM through the regulation, 
evaluation and integration of T&CM products, practices and practitioners 
into health systems, as appropriate.
The strategy has been developed to aid Member States in determining 
and prioritizing their needs, providing for effective delivery of services, and 
developing appropriate regulations and policy to ensure the safe use of T&CM 
products and practices. It is important to remember that this strategy is merely a 
guide to assist countries in developing T&CM strategic goals in accordance with 
their own national capacities, priorities, relevant legislation and circumstances. 
To this end, WHO is committed to monitoring the implementation of the 
strategy and will disseminate it as broadly as possible.
Keeping it current
Over the next decade, this strategy will need to be reviewed and reconsidered 
in order to ensure it remains relevant. It is anticipated that the strategy will 
be reviewed after five years to determine whether its objectives, directions 
and goals are still applicable and current. To determine the full impact of the 
strategy, a more thorough review will be completed at the end of its 10-year 
lifespan.
Measuring success
For the strategy to be effective, its outcomes must be measurable in a consistent 
and objective way. Though there are common elements in the way T&CM is 
used, differences exist between Member States. Performance indicators based 
on the three strategic objectives will have to be developed at the national 
level by each Member State individually. It is hoped that the general examples 
offered in this strategy document will aid Member States to develop indicators 
relevant to their specific needs. For the time being, WHO has developed a short 
list of key performance indicators bearing on each of the strategic objectives 
that will help to measure the success of the TM strategy and its advancement 
in Member States (see Table 1)
.

[page 59]
58
Table 1: Key performance indicators
Strategic objective Strategic direction Expected outcomes Critical indicator
4.1 To build the 
knowledge 
base for active 
management of 
T&CM through 
appropriate 
national policies
4.1.1 Understand 
and recognize 
the role and 
potential of 
T&CM
· T&CM practices and practitioners 
identified and analysed by Member State 
and country profile devised for T&CM.
· T&CM policies and programmes 
established by government.
· Number of Member States 
reporting a national/
provincial/state T&CM 
policy.
· Number of Member 
States reporting increased 
governmental/public 
research funding for T&CM; 
4.1.2 Strengthen the 
knowledge base, 
build evidence 
and sustain 
resources
· Strengthened knowledge generation, 
collaboration and sustainable use of TM 
resources.
4.2 To strengthen 
quality assurance, 
safety, proper use 
and effectiveness 
of T&CM by 
regulating 
products, practices 
and practitioners.
4.2.1 Recognize 
the role and 
importance 
of product 
regulation
· Established and implemented national 
regulation for T&CM products including 
registration.
· Strengthened safety monitoring of T&CM 
products and other T&CM therapies.
· Technical guidelines and methodology 
developed for evaluating safety, efficacy 
and quality of T&CM.
· Number of Member 
States reporting national 
regulation for T&CM 
products
· Number of Member 
States reporting national/
provincial/state regulation 
for T&CM practice
· Number of Member 
States reporting national/
provincial/state regulation/
registration for T&CM 
practitioners 
4.2.2 Recognize and 
develop practice 
and practitioner 
regulation 
for T&CM 
education and 
training, skills 
development, 
services and 
therapies
· Standards for T&CM products, practices 
and practitioners developed by 
government.
· Established education/training 
programme, benchmarks and 
implementation capacities for T&CM 
practitioners
· Improved safe and effective use of T&CM
4.3 To promote 
universal health 
coverage by 
integrating T&CM 
services into 
health care service 
delivery and self-
health care
4.3.1 Capitalize on 
the potential 
contribution of 
T&CM to improve 
health services 
and health 
outcomes.
· Integration of T&CM into the health 
system.
· Improved T&CM services and 
accessibility.
· Improved communication between 
conventional medicine practitioners, 
professional bodies and T&CM 
practitioners concerning the use of 
T&CM.
· Number of Member States 
reporting national plan/
programme/approaches for 
integrating T&CM service 
into the national health 
service delivery 
 
· Number of Member 
States reporting consumer 
education project/
programme for self-health 
care using T&CM 
4.3.2 Ensure 
consumers of 
T&CM can make 
informed choices 
about self-health 
care.
· Better awareness of and access to 
information about the proper use of 
T&CM.
· Improved communication between 
conventional medicine practitioners and 
their patients about T&CM use.
Implementing the Strategy

[page 60]
59
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
References
1. WHA62.13. Traditional medicine. In: Sixty-second World Health Assembly, Geneva, 
18–22 May 2009. Resolutions and decisions, annexes. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2009 (WHA62/2009/REC/1; http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/
WHA62-REC1/WHA62_REC1-en.pdf, accessed 3 September 2013):19–21.
2. WHO traditional medicine strategy.2002–2005.Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2002 (WHO/EDM/TRM/2002.1).
3. WHO medicines strategy.2004–2007.Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004 
(WHO/EDM/2004.5).
4. Continuity and change – implementing the third WHO medicines strategy: 2008–
2013.Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (WHO/EMP/2009.1).
5. WHA61.21. Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and 
intellectual property. In: Sixty-first World Health Assembly, Geneva, 19–24 May 2008. 
Resolutions and decisions, annexes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 
(WHA61/2008/REC/1; http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA61-REC1/A61_
REC1-en.pdf, accessed 3 September 2013):31–72
6. National policy on traditional medicine and regulation of herbal medicines: report of a 
WHO global survey. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005.
7. C. Traditional medicine. In: Implementation of resolutions (progress reports). Report 
by the Secretariat. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005 (A58/23; http://apps.
who.int/gb/archive/pdf_files/WHA58/A58_23-en.pdf, accessed 3 September 2013):5–
7.
8. Progress report on decade of traditional medicine in the African region. Brazzaville, 
WHO Regional Office for Africa, 2011 (AFR/RC61/PR/2).
9. Roberti di Sarsina P et al. Widening the paradigm in medicine and health: person-
centred medicine as the common ground of traditional, complementary, alternative 
and non-conventional medicine. In: Health care overview: new perspectives, 
advances in predictive, preventive and personalised medicine. Dordrecht, Springer 
Netherlands, 2012, 1: 335–353. 
10. European Information Centre for Complementary & Alternative Medicine [web site]. 
(http://www.eiccam.eu/home.php?il=1&l=eng)
11. Barnes PM et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use among adults and 
children: United States, 2007. Hyattsville, MD, National Center for Health Statistics, 
2008 (National health statistics reports, No. 12).
12. [Analysis of the economic status of the medical industry in 2012] (in Chinese). Place 
 of publication, National Development and Reform Commission of China, 2013 
 (http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/gyfz/gyfz/t20130228_530336.htm).
13. The regional strategy for traditional medicine in the Western Pacific (2011–2020). 
Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 2012.

[page 61]
60
14. Nahin RL et al. Costs of Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) and 
Frequency of Visits to CAM Practitioners: United States, 2007. National health 
statistics reports, No. 18. Hyattsville, Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics, 
2009.
15. Australian social trends, 2008: complementary therapies. Sydney, Australian Bureau 
of Statistics, 2008 (Report No. 4102.0; http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/
Lookup/4102.0Chapter5202008, accessed 3 September 2013).
16. [Report of a survey on T&CM basic situation in 2009] (in Chinese). Place of 
publication, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2011.
17. Lao Ministry of Health and World Health Organization. Health Service Delivery Profile, 
Lao PDR, 2012. Compiled in collaboration between WHO and Ministry of Health, Lao 
PDR, 2012. (http://www.wpro.who.int/health_services/service_delivery_profile_laopdr.
pdf)
18. AlBedah AMN et al. The use of and out-of-pocket spending on complementary and 
alternative medicine in Qassim province, Saudi Arabia. Annals of Saudi Medicine, 
2013, 33(3):282–289 (http://www.annsaudimed.net/index.php/vol33/vol233iss3/576.
html).
19. Abdullahi AA. Trends and challenges of traditional medicine in Africa. African Journal 
of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicine, 2011, 8(Suppl.):115–123 
 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3252714/, accessed 3 September 
2013).
20. Roberti di Sarsina P. The social demand for a medicine focused on the person: 
the contribution of CAM to healthcare and healthgenesis. In: Evidence-based 
complementary and alternative medicine, 2007, 4 (Suppl. 1):45–51 (doi:10.1093/
ecam/nem094).
21. Sharples FMC et al. NHS patients’ perspective on complementary medicine: a survey. 
Complementary Therapies in Medicine, 2003, 11(4):243–248.
22. Williamson M et al. Information use and needs of complementary medicine users. 
Sydney, National Prescribing Service, 2008 (http://www.nps.org.au/data/assets/pdf_
file/0010/66619/Complementary_Medicines_Report_-_Consumers.pdf).
23. WHO Guidelines on developing consumer information on proper use of traditional, 
complementary and alternative medicine. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
24. Chao S et al. Musculoskeletal disorders: Does the osteopathic medical profession 
demonstrate its unique and distinctive characteristics? Journal of the American 
Osteopathic Association, 2004, 104(4):149-155.
25. Rossignol M et al. Who seeks primary care for musculoskeletal disorders with 
physicians prescribing homeopathic and other complementary medicine? Results 
from the EPI3-LASER survey in France. BioMed Central (BMC) Musculoskeletal 
Disorder, 2011, 12: 21-26. (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2474/12/21)
26. Skovgaard L et al. Use of Complementary and Alternative Medicine among People 
with Multiple Sclerosis in the Nordic Countries. Autoimmune Diseases, 2012: 841085, 
Published online 2012 December 11. doi: 10.1155/2012/841085
 (http://pubmedcentralcanada.ca/pmcc/articles/PMC3529905/).
References

[page 62]
61
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
27. Zhang Q et al. The importance of traditional Chinese medicine services in health care 
provision in China. Universitas Forum, 2011, 2(2): 1-8.
28. Self-health care in the context of primary health care: report of the regional 
consultation, Bangkok, Dear New Delhi, WHO South-East Asia Regional Office 
(SEARO), 2009.
29. Report of WHO interregional workshop on the use of traditional medicines in primary 
health. Mongolia, World Health Organization,2007.
30. Korthals-de Bos IBC et al. Cost effectiveness of physiotherapy, manual therapy, and 
general practitioner care for neck pain: economic evaluation alongside a randomised 
controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 2003, 326: 911–916.
31. Kooreman P, Baars EW. Patients whose GP knows complementary medicine tend 
to have lower costs and live longer. European Journal of Health Economics, 2012, 
13(6):769–776.
32. AYUSH in India. New Delhi, Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH), 2010 (http://www.indianmedicine.nic.in/index1.
asp?lang=1&linkid=18&lid=42).
33. Report of the Steering Committee on AYUSH for 12th Five Year Plan (2012–17). New 
Delhi, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Planning Commission, 2011.
34. Von Ammon K et al. Complementary and Alternative Medicine Provision in Europe 
– First Results Approaching Reality in an Unclear Field of Practices. Forschende 
Komplementärmedizin, 2012, 19 (suppl 2): 37-43.
35. Wiesener S et al. Legal Status and Regulation of Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine in Europe. Forschende Komplementärmedizin, 2012, 19 (suppl 2): 29-36.
36. Government of Singapore. Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners Act, Chapter 
333a, Section 14 (4), Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners (Registration of 
Acupuncturists) Regulations. Singapore, 23 February 2001 (http://statutes.agc.gov.
sg/aol/search/display/view.w3p;page=0;query=CompId%3Afb13d2d4-0969-4ce7-
bfc8-09cf953d4d83%20ValidTime%3A20120107000000%20TransactionTime%3A20
120107000000;rec=0).
37. Techadamrongsin Y et al (eds). Development of traditional Chinese medicine in 
Thailand. Bangkok, Union of Agriculture Cooperatives in Thailand Printing, 2011.
38. Chinese Medicine Council of Hong Kong (CMCHK). Regulation of Chinese medicine 
practitioners [online database] (http://www.cmchk.org.hk/cmp/eng/#main_rcmp.htm, 
accessed 01/08/2013).
39. World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization and World 
Trade Organization. Promoting Access to Medical Technologies and Innovation – 
Intersections between public health, intellectual property and trade. Geneva, WHO-
WIPO-WTO, 2012.
40. World Health Organization. 65th World Health Assembly (WHA), 2012: Address by Dr 
Margaret Chan, Director-General, to the Sixty-fifth World Health Assembly (A65/3, 21 
May 2012).
41. World Health Organization. 132th session of WHO Executive Board: Draft twelfth 
general programme of work. EB132/26, 21 December 2012. (http://apps.who.int/gb/
ebwha/pdf_files/EB132/B132_26-en.pdf)

[page 63]
62
42. World Health Organization. Legal status of traditional medicine and complementary/
alternative medicine: a worldwide review: WHO/EDM/TRM/2001.2. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2001.
43. Moschik EC et al. Usage and Attitudes of Physicians in Japan Concerning 
Traditional Japanese Medicine (Kampo Medicine): A Descriptive Evaluation of a 
Representative Questionnaire-Based Survey. Evidence-Based Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine, 2012. Volume 2012, Article ID 139818, 13 pages, 
doi:10.1155/2012/139818.
44. Government of Japan, Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW). Annual 
Health, Labour and Welfare Report 2011–2012. Ministry of Health, Labour and 
Welfare, Japan, 2012. (http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/wp/wp-hw6/dl/02e.pdf)
45. Chan M. Address at the WHO Congress on Traditional Medicine, Beijing, November 
2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008. (http://www.who.int/dg/
speeches/2008/20081107/en/index.html#)
46. Government of China, National Bureau of Statistics of China. China Statistical 
Yearbook 2011: Chinese Medicine (1987-2010). The State Administration of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, China. (http://www.satcm.gov.cn/1987-2010/start.htm)
47. Frass M et al. Use and Acceptance of Complementary and Alternative Medicine Among 
the General Population and Medical Personnel: A Systematic Review. The Ochsner 
Journal, 2012, 12(1): 45-56.
48. Swiss Confederation. Fünf Methoden der Komplementärmedizin werden unter 
bestimmten Bedingungen während sechs Jahren provisorisch vergütet (Five CAM 
methods eligible for reimbursement under specific conditions for a provisional period 
of six years). Bundesamt für Gesundheit (press release), Swiss Confederation, 
12.01.2011 (www.bag.admin.ch/aktuell/00718/01220/index.html?lang=de&msg-
id=37173). 
49. European Commission for Homeopathy (ECH). Report on Swiss Report on the 
Complementary Medicine Evaluation Programme (PEK). European Committee 
for Homeopathy (ECH), 2005. (http://www.portalhomeopatia.com.br/documentos/
Report%20on%20PEK%20study.pdf, accessed 31/7/2013).
50. Sundberg T et al. Towards a model for integrative medicine in Swedish primary care. 
BMC Health Services Research 2007, 7: 107 (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-
6963/7/107).
51. Rawlins M. De testimonio: on the evidence for decisions about the use of therapeutic 
interventions (Harveian Oration). Lancet, 2008, 372: 2152-61.
52. European Commission (EC). Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 9 March 2011 on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border 
healthcare (http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:088:00
45:0065:EN:PDF). 
References

[page 64]
63
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Annex A – Selected examples of notable T&CM initiatives by region/country
 
WHO Region Selected examples of notable T&CM initiatives
Africa · Within the WHO African Region, progress has been made in policy development and 
provider education. The number of African countries with national T&CM policies increased 
from eight in 1999/2000 to 39 in 2010, and those with national T&CM strategic plans rose 
from zero to 18. Country regulatory frameworks increased from one in 1999/2000 to 28 
in 2010, including various instruments such as the code of ethics and the legal framework 
for T&CM practitioners. By 2010, eight countries had institutionalized training programs 
for T&CM practitioners and 13 countries developed training programs for health science 
students and T&CM (1).
· Since 2003, countries in the African Region have been hosting an annual African Traditional 
Medicine Day. Traditional health practitioners, conventional health practitioners, scientists, 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other stakeholders come together to engage 
on joint activities such as exhibitions, debates, symposia, seminars, panel discussions and 
cultural shows. These events have raised the profile of T&CM and awareness of its activities. 
In 2010 some countries instituted a National Traditional Medicine Week (1). 
· By 2010, 22 countries were conducting research on traditional medicines for malaria, HIV/
AIDS, sickle-cell anaemia, diabetes and hypertension using WHO guidelines. Subsequently 
four countries included traditional medicines in their National Essential Medicines Lists 
(NEMLs) (1). 
· Twelve countries issued marketing authorizations for T&CM, ranging from three products 
in Cameroon and Congo to over 1000 in Ghana and Nigeria, compared to Mali alone at 
the time of the baseline survey. 
· Guidelines for the protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) and traditional medicine 
knowledge (TMK) have been developed. By 2010, six countries had national tools for IPR 
and TMK protection versus zero in 1999/2000. Eight countries have established databases 
on traditional medicine practitioners, TMK and access to biological resources (1). 
· Training tools were developed for health sciences students and traditional practitioners 
(AFRO, 2011).
Americas
Brazil:
· The Ministry of Health in Brazil has developed a National Policy on Integrative and 
Complementary Practices which was “implemented for political, technical, economic, 
social, and cultural reasons” (Retrieved from http://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/
pnpic_access_expansion_initiative.pdf).
Canada:
· A number of relevant policy, regulatory, and related issues and activities can be viewed at 
the Government of Canada’s “Health Canada” portal: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/
prodnatur/index-eng.php.
· Comprehensive regulatory frameworks for natural health products including herbal and 
traditional medicines were introduced in Canada (http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/
prodnatur/nhp-new-nouvelle-psn-eng.php, retrieved 3 August 2013). 
United States of America:
· In the USA, steps have been taken to strengthen provisions in the regulatory framework for 
dietary supplements especially in relation to Good Manufacturing Practices and adverse 
event reporting. (http://www.fda.gov/food/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/
guidancedocuments/die tarysupplements/ucm257563.htm, retrieved 10 August 2012) 
· The Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health (NIH), has devoted 
considerable resources to developing validated analytical methods and reference 
materials to guide stakeholders on Quality Assurance (QA)/Quality Control (QC) of dietary 
supplements in its Analytical Methods/Reference Material (AMRM) program (http://ods.
od.nih.gov/Research/AMRMProgramWebsite.aspx). 
· The FTC (Federal Trade Commission) has published guidelines and monitors commercial 
advertisements on dietary supplements, including botanicals (http://business.ftc.gov/
documents/bus09-dietary-supplements-advertising-guide-industry).

[page 65]
64
Eastern 
Mediterranean
· In the East Mediterranean Region (EMR), fifteen Member States (88%) use different types 
of T&CM. Seven Member States (41%) had established a national policy on T&CM by 2010 
and three (18%) reported that a national T&CM policy was being devised. A further seven 
Member States (41%) reported that they had national T&CM regulation. The Council of 
the Arab Health Ministers is discussing a project for harmonizing legislation on traditional, 
complementary and alternative medicine in the Arab countries. The December 2011 
Eastern Mediterranean Drug Regulatory Authorities Conference (EMDRAC) addressed 
regulatory harmonization, including T&CM. Five Member States reported that they already 
had regulations for practitioners, with explicit regulations for different disciplines such as 
acupuncture, ayurveda, homeopathy and herbal medicine in four of them. The United Arab 
Emirates have made considerable progress in the regulation of T&CM practitioners
1.
Saudi Arabia:
· Saudi Arabia has addressed the problem of widely available unregulated herbal products. 
The Saudi Food and Drug Administration (SFDA) will consider the registration of herbal 
products containing 1 to 5 herbal medicine components but not any herbal product 
containing more than five components
1.
Europe European Union:
· The three-year pan-European research network, CAMbrella (www.cambrella.eu), aims to 
evaluate the conditions underpinning T&CM use and provision in Europe and to develop 
a roadmap for future European T&CM research. CAMbrella encompasses 16 academic 
research groups from 12 European countries and its major findings were presented at the 
European Parliament in November 2012 (2).
· T&CM legislation is being developed with the intention of adopting a harmonized 
approach to the regulation of herbal medicines across the European Union (Association 
of the European Self-Medication Industry (AESGP), Legal and Regulatory Framework for 
Herbal Medicines, 2010 (http://www.self-medication.org/publications/countryProfiles.asp). 
Belgium:
· Detailed information is available for homeopathy, acupuncture, osteopathy and chiropractic 
including scientific literature reviews, population surveys, product consumption patterns, 
sociological aspects, practices, legal frameworks, training, professional organizations, 
patients’ associations and reimbursement policies (3). 
Switzerland:
· The Swiss Government is investigating if T&CM can prove its worth as an insurable health 
cost (4). The Government of Switzerland has published a Health Technology Assessment 
(HTA) (5).
Italy:
· A study of “Cost-effectiveness researches on traditional/complementary medicine in 
Lombardy region – Italy” in 2012 shows that for podalic malposition and labour pain 
the cost savings in using T&CM therapy are at least 24.2% and 108.8 euros respectively 
compared to the common conventional medicine procedure (http://www.regione.
lombardia.it/cs/Satellite).
Annex A
1 Communication with WHO from the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, 2013.

[page 66]
65
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
South-East Asia · In the WHO South-East Asia Region (SEARO), the most notable progress concerns 
the introduction of new T&CM policies and inclusion of T&CM representation within 
government agencies (e.g., establishment of a new T&CM division or delegation of 
government staff to T&CM issues). Between 2002 and 2012, five countries developed 
national T&CM policies: all SEARO Member States except Timor-Leste now have national 
policies in place, including T&CM expert committees and offices in the respective Ministries 
of Health. Ten countries in the South-East Asia Region have national T&CM programmes 
(6). In February 2013, the Government of India, in collaboration with the WHO South-
East Asia Regional Office, organized an international conference on traditional medicine in 
New Delhi, at which participating countries agreed to cooperate, collaborate and mutually 
support each other in the field of traditional medicine by adopting the Delhi Declaration 
on Traditional Medicine
1.
· In 2003, the WHO Regional Committee for South-East Asia developed a regional resolution 
on traditional systems of medicine (SEA/RC56/R6) in order to encourage the regional 
progress of TM. In several countries local T&CM systems have been recognized by the 
respective governments, such as ayurveda and unani in Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Sri 
Lanka, sowa rigpa in Bhutan, jamu in Indonesia, koryo medicine in Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea, dhivehibeys in Maldives, Myanmar TM in Myanmar and Thai TM in 
Thailand. In Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, koryo medicine is so integrated in the 
national health system that both TM and conventional health care are available in the 
same health facilities at all three levels of care. Both health systems are offered in separate 
facilities at secondary and tertiary levels in nine countries, of which eight have begun to 
integrate TM and conventional health care at the primary level (6).
· Since 2003, two countries have developed new regulations on traditional and herbal 
medicines and three Member States elaborated existing ones: nine countries therefore 
have regulations in place. Nepal established a National Formulary of herbal monographs in 
2008, while another four countries updated their existing pharmacopoeias. In total, seven 
countries have national pharmacopoeias. Six countries have lists of essential traditional and 
herbal medicines. India and Indonesia contribute the International Regulatory Cooperation 
for Herbal Medicines (IRCH) (6).
· Efforts have been made to improve information exchange between Member States in 
order to promote the therapeutically sound use of TM and herbal medicine by providers 
and consumers. In Sri Lanka, the Central Department of Traditional Medicine, teaching 
institutions, hospitals and research institutions are involved in this process. A web site 
(HerbalNet) was launched by WHO in 2009 as an “digital repository” to encourage 
evidence-based information about national standards to be shared across the region; it is 
now accessed by other interested institutions around the world (6). 
· Bhutan, Myanmar and Maldives have been assisted by WHO to carry out studies on 
public awareness of, attitude towards and practices in their respective TM systems. India 
undertook a systematic review of herbal medicines used for common chronic diseases and 
PHC diseases with encouraging results for TM integration in the national health system 
(6). In Bangladesh, there are 469 small factories (268 unani and 201 ayurvedic) producing 
traditional drugs worth approximately US$ 100 million every year at present (7).
In February 2013, regional Member States adopted the Delhi Declaration on Traditional 
Medicine, which has 9 items for cooperation, collaboration and mutual support. They 
include promoting national policies and strategies for equitable development and 
appropriate use of TM, pursuing a harmonized approach to TM education, practice, 
research, documentation and regulation, exploring the possibility of promoting mutual 
recognition of educational qualifications, pharmacopoeias and monographs, expanding 
common TM reference documents, encouraging sustainable development and resource 
augmentation of medicinal plants, and exchanging perspectives, experiences and experts 
in order to integrate traditional medicine into national health systems
1.
1 Communication with WHO from the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2013.

[page 67]
66
Western Pacific · Government support for TM varies considerably across the 37 countries and jurisdictions of 
the WHO Western Pacific Region. In 2012, WPRO published its regional TM Strategy which 
Member States are in the process of implementing. In 2010, 18 countries and jurisdictions 
had developed official government documents (including national policies, regulations or 
laws) applicable to TM, compared to 12 countries and jurisdictions with official documents 
before 2000. The number of countries regulating herbal medicines was 10 in 2001; this had 
increased to 16 in 2010. The implementation of standards for Good Manufacturing Practices 
(GMP) for herbal medicines showed a significant increase from 2001 when no countries or 
jurisdictions in the region reported applying GMP for TM products; there are now nine countries 
and jurisdictions with active GMP in 2010. The establishment of national pharmacopoeias or 
monographs has also increased in the last decade: four countries and jurisdictions had national 
pharmacopoeias in 2001 compared to nine in 2010 (8).
· Examples of recent progress include Nauru, which developed a national policy in 2009, and 
Cambodia, which issued a policy on TM in 2010. Fiji, Kiribati, Niue, New Caledonia and the 
Federated States of Micronesia are all in the process of establishing national policies on TM (8).
· Singapore and New Zealand have introduced comprehensive regulatory frameworks for herbal 
and traditional medicines. New Zealand proposed legislation for the regulation of natural health 
products in 2010, as set out in the Natural Health and Supplementary Products Bill, which 
received its second reading in March 2013 (http://www.parliament.nz/en-NZ/PB/Legislation/
Bills/b/c/8/00DBHOH_BILL11034_1-Natural-Health-Products-Bill.htm and http://www.hsa.
gov.sg/publish/hsaportal/en/ health_products_regulation/complementary_medicines.html). 
Australia is also reviewing and updating its existing regulatory framework for complementary 
medicines (http://www.anao.gov.au/publications/audit-reports/2011-2012/therapeutic-goods-
regulation-complementary-medicines, retrieved 1 August 2013). 
· Across the region there has been an increase in government activities related to TM, including 
the establishment of a national office and/or a national expert committee. Fiji, Nauru and Tuvalu 
are in the process of establishing government bodies for TM. In the Philippines, regulation for 
acupuncture providers was issued in 2008. 
· Regarding the development of research institutes for TM, 13 countries and areas in the region 
currently have a national institute, while research is carried out by other facilities elsewhere. To 
date, 14 countries and areas in the Region have established a university-level TM course, 12 of 
which provide instruction to at least bachelor-level while seven have doctoral programmes. Ten 
countries currently have health insurance coverage for TM provided by the government and/or 
private sectors. In most cases however, the health insurance is partial and only covers specific 
areas such as acupuncture, chiropractic and herbal medicine.
Australia:
· The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) determined that all states and territories in 
Australia should regulate the practice of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Consequently, national 
registration of practitioners of Chinese herbal medicine and acupuncture and dispensers of 
Chinese herbal medicine commenced on 1 July 2012. The fastest growing group of T&CM 
practitioners in the country are osteopaths, who tripled in number between 1996 and 2006 (9). 
Cambodia:
· In 2009, the Cambodian Government commissioned a national TM policy which set standards 
for the quality, safety and efficacy of herbal and other TM products and TM practices within 
Cambodia.
New Zealand:
· New Zealand serves as an example of how the industrial sector for natural health products 
continues to increase. The New Zealand natural health product industry accounts for 
approximately NZ$ 1.1 billion yearly, with 80% exported primarily to Australia, North America 
and parts of Asia. Growth has increased dramatically, from NZ$ 400 million in 2004 to NZ$ 
760 million in 2007.
Annex A

[page 68]
67
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
References 
1. World Health Organization. Progress report on decade of traditional medicine in the 
Africa region. Brazzaville, WHO African Region (AFRO), AFR/RC61/PR/2, 5 July 2011.
2. Weidenhammer W et al. EU FP7 Project ‘CAMbrella’ to Build European Research Network 
for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Forschende Komplementärmedizin 
2011, 18(2): 69-76 (doi: 10.1159/000327310).
3. De Gendt T et al. Homeopathy: state of affairs in Belgium. Brussel, Federaal 
Kenniscentrum voor de Gezondheidszorg/Centre fédéral d’expertise des soins de 
santé Belgium, 2011 (supplement). Report No.: KCE rapporten 154S
4. Dacey, Jessica. Alternative therapies are put to the Test. International service of the 
Swiss broadcasting service. January 14, 2011 (http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/swiss_
news/ Alternative_therapies_are_put_to_the_test.html?cid=29242484, retrieved 1 
August 2013).
5. Bornhöft G, Matthiessen PF, eds. Homeopathy in health care – effectiveness, 
appropriateness, safety, costs. An HTA report on homeopathy as part of the Swiss 
Complementary Medicine Evaluation Programme. Heidelberg, Springer Verlag, 2011
6. World Health Organization. Development of traditional medicine in the South-East 
Asia Region (communication with WHO). New Delhi, WHO South-East Asia Regional 
Office (SEARO), progress report, 2012.
7. World Health Organization. Development of a regional framework on public health, 
innovation and intellectual property: report of a regional consultation. New Delhi, India, 
WHO South-East Asia Regional Office (SEARO), April 2011.
8. World Health Organization. The Regional Strategy for Traditional Medicine in the 
Western Pacific (2011–2020). Manila, WHO Western Pacific Regional Office, 2012.
9. Australian social trends, 2008: complementary therapies. Sydney, Australian Bureau 
of Statistics, 2008 (Report No. 4102.0; (http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/
Lookup/4102.0Chapter5202008, accessed 3 September 2013).

[page 69]
68
Annex B – Information on selected global T&CM professional
organizations
NGO Activities
World Federation 
of Hydrotherapy 
and Climatotherapy 
(FEMTEC) (1)
Progress:
• In many European countries, Hydrotherapy (HT) is widely used and therapies are included in 
national health care systems. These countries have a regulation on the use of HT and specific 
educational programmes. 
• In North Africa and South-East Asia, HT is part of a long tradition and increasing demand is 
driving legislative and regulatory development.
• In many Latin American countries, ministries of health recognize HT.
Challenges:
• In several countries, HT is considered as being either a complementary medicine with no 
reimbursement options, or a leisure and wellness activity. It has proved difficult to evaluate 
the efficacy of HT. This limits the ability of authorities to fund these therapies, as well as the 
ability of consumers to obtain information on HT. Research is mostly limited to European 
studies.
World Federation 
of Acupuncture-
Moxibustion 
Societies (WFAS)
Progress:
• According to the result of a survey conducted by the World Federation of Acupuncture and 
Moxibustion Societies, acupuncture was used in 183 out of 202 surveyed countries. Of the 
192 Member States of the United Nations, 178 (93%) have acupuncture practice and 59 
acupuncture organizations.
• Legislation: in many countries, partial or complete insurance cover is available for 
acupuncture. Between 1998 and 2000, the coverage rate of acupuncture insurance rose 
from 12% to 17%.
• Education: several countries offer acupuncture courses and degrees. More and more 
governments are adopting official licensing systems for acupuncture practitioners which 
require academic training, examination and registration. Between 2002 and 2011, 91 
medical colleges in the US integrated complementary and alternative medicine into their 
compulsory educational curriculum for conventional medicine.
Challenges:
• Acupuncture has not yet gained an equal footing with conventional medicine in some 
countries, and often only conventional medical doctors are allowed to practise acupuncture.
• International standards on acupuncture are lacking.
• There is a dearth of evidence due to scarce funding for scientific research on acupuncture.
• Associated practices like moxibustion and blood-letting are disappearing.
World Federation of 
Chiropractic (WFC) 
(3)
Progress:
• Since 2000, the chiropractic profession has expanded from North America and the United 
Kingdom to all world regions, due to new educational programmes, legislation to regulate 
the profession and publication of WHO guidelines. Common international standards are 
now widely maintained, both in the educational and legislative fields, owing to the support 
of international associations.
• Increased numbers of chiropractic graduates and increasing funding in Europe and North 
America have resulted in increasing research opportunities and a stronger evidence base.
• Significant steps have been made to encourage collaboration and integration between 
chiropractic and medical professions.
Challenges:
• In countries where practices are unregulated, other health providers claim to offer chiropractic 
services.
• Funding is generally limited to education and research, whereas it is required to increase 
policy input.
• Patients experience barriers in accessing chiropractic services (limited offer of chiropractic 
services outside of North America and financial disincentive, since chiropractic is excluded 
from most private and government health plans).
Annex B

[page 70]
69
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
World Federation of 
Chinese Medicine 
Societies (WFCMS) 
(4)
Progress:
• Chinese Medicine has spread to more than 100 countries and has grown into an 
international industry. There are about 100 000 Chinese medicine clinics, about 300 000 
Chinese medicine practitioners and no less than 1000 Chinese medicine education institutes 
worldwide. Research has profited from the largesse of funding. 
• Of the various Chinese medicine modalities, acupuncture is the most used worldwide. In the 
United States it has acquired legal status in 43 States. 
• In China itself, Chinese medicine has been nationally and locally integrated into the health 
system: from a government perspective Chinese medicine and conventional medicine have 
an equal ranking. The export of Chinese medicinal products has registered a constant 
increase since 1999.
Challenges:
• In some countries, national regulatory frameworks now require Chinese medicine products 
to be sold only as health products or non-medicinal foods. 
• Chinese medicine needs to obtain legal status in some countries. 
Osteopathic 
International 
Alliance (OIA) (5)
Progress:
• Osteopathy is currently used in over 80 countries: there are an estimated 120 000 osteopaths 
and osteopathic physicians, which is twice the figure of ten years ago. 
• In the United States, the number of osteopathic physicians increased 73% between 2000 
and 2012: they account for more than 6.5% of the total physician population.
• There has been a significant increase in the number of universities and colleges offering 
training in osteopathy, as well as in students attending these courses.
• Regulation of providers has been increasing.
• Osteopathy is partly funded within national health systems.
References
1. FEMTEC/FORST, 2013: Communication to WHO from the World Federation of Hydrotherapy 
(FEMTEC) and Climatotherapy and FORST Foundation (FORST) in May/2013.– unpublished data 
unavailable to audience.
2. WFAS, 2013: Communication to WHO from the World Federation of Acupuncture-Moxibustion 
Societies (WFAS) in March/2013.– unpublished data unavailable to audience.
3. WFC, 2012: Communication to WHO from the World Federation of Chiropractic (WFC) in 
February/2012.– unpublished data unavailable to audience.
4. WFCMS, 2013: Communication to WHO from the World Federation of Chinese Medicine Societies 
(WFCMS) in December/2012.– unpublished data unavailable to audience.
5. OIA, 2013: Communication to WHO Osteopathic International Alliance (OIA) in April/2013. – 
unpublished data unavailable to audience.

[page 71]
70
Annex C – Selected WHO publications on T&CM 
As of May 2013, the following abbreviations are used to indicate the availability of 
language editions:
[A] Arabic; [C] Chinese; [F] French; [R] Russian; [S] Spanish.
An asterisk* indicates a language edition in preparation.
Bold type face indicates publication and language versions made available since 
2002.
Policy
POlicy directiOn and strategy
the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-2023, WHO, geneva.
WHO Western Pacific Regional Strategy on traditional medicine: 2011–2020. 
Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 2012. (ISBN 978 
92 9061 559 0)
Development of traditional medicine in the South-East Asia region: Report 
of a regional consultative meeting. Pyongyang, Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea, 22-24 June 2005. WHO Regional Office for South-
East Asia, New Delhi, 2005. (document reference SEA-Trad.Med.84).
WHO Policy Perspectives on Medicines, Traditional Medicine - Growing 
Needs and Potential. Geneva, WHO, 2002. (document reference WHO/
EDM/2002.4) [A], [C], [F], [R], [S]
The WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002–2005. geneva, WHO, 2002. 
(document reference WHO/EDM/TRM/ 2002.1) [A], [C], [F], [R], [S]
Promoting the role of traditional medicine in health systems: A strategy for the 
African region Harare, WHO Regional Office for Africa, Harare, 2001 
(document reference AFR/RC50/9).
Apia Action Plan on Traditional Medicine in the Pacific Island Countries , Manila, 
WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 2001. 
Development of National Policy on Traditional Medicine . Manila, WHO Regional 
Office for the Western Pacific, 2000.
The Promotion and Development of Traditional Medicine: Report of a WHO 
Meeting. Geneva, WHO, 1978 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 622).
natiOnal POlicy and regulatiOn mOnit Oring
National policy and regulation of traditional medicine: report of the second 
WHO global survey. Geneva, WHO (in preparation).
Regulatory situation of manual therapies; a worldwide review. geneva, 
WHO, (in preparation).
National policy on traditional medicine and regulation of herbal medicines: 
report of a WHO global survey. Geneva, WHO, 2005 (ISBN 92 4 159323 7).
Annex C

[page 72]
71
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
Legal status of traditional medicine and complementary/alternative medicine: a 
worldwide review. Geneva, WHO, 2001 (document reference WHO/EDM/
TRM/2001.2). [F]*, [R], [S]*
Traditional Health Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean: Baseline 
Information. Washington, Pan American Health Organization/WHO, 2000.
Regulatory Situation of Herbal Medicines: a worldwide review. Geneva, WHO, 
1998 (document reference WHO/TRM/ 98.1). [F], [S]
PROMOTION AND PRESERvATION OF TRADITIONAl MEDICINE 
knOWledge
Report of the Inter-Regional Workshop on Intellectual Property Rights in the 
Context of Traditional Medicine, Bangkok, Thailand, 6-8 December 2000 . 
Geneva, WHO, 2001 (document reference WHO/EDM/TRM/ 2001.1).
Quality, safety and efficacy
HERBAl MEDICINES - QUAlITY AND SAFETY
WHO guidelines on good processing practices for herbal medicines. geneva, 
WHO, (in preparation).
WHO guidelines on safety management of toxic medicinal plants and 
monographs on selected toxic medicinal plants. Geneva, WHO (in 
preparation).
WHO guidelines on selection of substances of herbal origin for quality 
control of herbal medicines. Geneva, WHO (in preparation).
Quality control methods for herbal materials (updated edition of 1998 
publication). Geneva, WHO, 2011 (ISBN 978 92 4 150073 9).
Safety issues in the preparation of homoeopathic medicines. geneva, WHO, 
2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 159884 2).
WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to 
contaminants and residues. Geneva, WHO, 2007 (ISBN 978 92 4 159444 
8). [F]*, [S]*
WHO guidelines on good manufacturing practices (GMP) for herbal medicines. 
Geneva, WHO 2007 (ISBN 92 4 154627 1).
WHO good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) monograph on 
Artemisia annua L. Geneva, WHO, 2006 (ISBN 978 92 4 159443 1). [C]
Good manufacturing practices: Updated supplementary guidelines for the 
manufacture of herbal medicines. annex 3 of WHO expert committee 
on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations, Fortieth report 
(WHO Technical Report Series, No. 937). Geneva, WHO, 2006 (ISBN 92 
4 120937 2).
WHO Guidelines on good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) for 
medicinal plants. Geneva, WHO, 2003 (ISBN 92 4 154627 1). [A], [C], [F], 
[R], [S]

[page 73]
72
Basic tests for drugs: pharmaceutical substances, medicinal plant materials and 
dosage forms. Geneva, WHO, 1998 (ISBN 92 4 154513 5). [A], [C], [F], [R], 
[S]
Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, WHO, 1998 (ISBN 
92 4 154510 0).
Good Manufacturing Practices: Supplementary Guidelines for the Manufacture 
of Herbal Medicinal Products. Annex 8 of WHO Expert Committee on 
Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-fourth Report (WHO 
Technical Report Series, No. 863). Geneva, WHO, 1996 (ISBN 92 4 120863 
5).[F], [S]
HERBAl MEDICINES - REGUlATION
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants commonly used in Newly 
Independent States. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 159772 2), 
(ISBN 978 92 4 459772 9). [R]
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Volume 4. geneva, WHO, 
2009 (ISBN 978 92 4 154715 5).
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Volume 3. geneva, WHO, 
2007 (ISBN 978 92 4 154702 4).
Guidelines on minimum requirements for the registration of herbal medicinal 
products in the Eastern Mediterranean Region [a report of the first regional 
workshop on regulation of herbal medicines, Teheran, Iran, 14-17 December 
2002 and the second regional workshop on regulation of herbal medicines, 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 7-9 June 2003]. Cairo, WHO regional 
Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, Cairo, 2006 (document reference 
WHO-EM/EDB7048/E).
Report: Regional meeting on traditional medicine and herbal medicines, 
Guatemala City, Guatemala, 18 - 20 February 2003 . Washington DC, 
WHO Regional Office for Americas, 2005. [S]
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance 
systems. Geneva, WHO, 2004 (ISBN 92 4 159221 4). [C]*, [F]*, [S]*
Guidelines for the regulation of herbal medicines in the South-East Asia 
Region [a report on the regional workshop on the regulation of herbal 
medicines]. New Delhi, WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia, 2004 
(document reference SEA-Trad. Med. -82).
Guidelines on registration of traditional medicines in the WHO African 
Region [a report on the first regional workshop on regulation of traditional 
medicines, Johannesburg, South Africa, 1-3 April 2003 and the second 
regional workshop on regulation of traditional medicines, Madrid, Spain, 
13-14 February 2004]. Brazaville, WHO Regional Office for Africa, 2004 
(document reference AFR/TRM/04.1).
Report of WHO workshop on registration of herbal medicines in the European 
Region, Yerevan, Armenia, 22-24 September 2003, copenhagen, WHO 
Regional Office for Europe, 2004 (document reference WHO/EDM/
TRM/2004.1). [R] 
Annex C

[page 74]
73
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Volume 2. geneva, WHO, 
2002 (ISBN 92 4 154537 2).
General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional 
Medicine. Geneva, WHO, 2000 (document reference WHO/EDM/
TRM/2000.1). [F], [R], [S]
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Volume 1. Geneva, WHO, 1999 
(ISBN 92 4 154517 8).
Guidelines for the Assessment of Herbal Medicines. Annex 11 of WHO Expert 
Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-fourth 
Report. Geneva, WHO, 1996 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 863). [F], 
[S] 
researcH metHOdOlOgies and clinical studies
Key technical issues on safety of herbal medicines with reference to 
interaction with other medicines. Geneva, WHO (in preparation).
Traditional medicines: review and analysis of reports of controlled clinical 
studies. Geneva, WHO (in preparation).
Clinical studies in traditional medicine: Key technical issues on 
methodologies. Geneva, WHO (in preparation).
Guidelines on clinical study of traditional medicines in WHO African Region. 
Brazaville, WHO Regional Office for Africa, 2004 (document reference 
AFR/TRM/04.4), WHO (document reference AFR/TRM/04.4).
SARS: clinical trials on treatment using a combination of Traditional Chinese 
medicine and Western medicine. Geneva, WHO, 2004 (ISBN 92 4 154643 
3). [C]
Acupuncture: Review and analysis of reports on controlled clinical trials. 
Geneva, WHO, 2002 (ISBN 92 4 154543 7).
General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional 
Medicine. Geneva, WHO, 2000 (document reference WHO/EDM/
TRM/2000.1). [F], [R], [S]
Traditional and Modern Medicine: Harmonizing the two approaches. Manila, WHO 
Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 2000. 
Guidelines for Clinical Research on Acupuncture . Manila, WHO Regional Office 
for the Western Pacific, 1995 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific 
Series No. 15).
Research Guidelines for Evaluating the Safety and Efficacy of Herbal Medicines . 
Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 1993.
Clinical Evaluation of Traditional Medicines and Natural Products. Report of a WHO 
Consultation on Traditional Medicine and AIDS, Geneva, 26-28 September 
1990.Geneva, WHO, 1990 (document reference WHO/TRM/GPA/90.2).
In Vitro Screening for Anti-HIV Activities. Report of an Informal WHO Consultation 
on Traditional Medicine and AIDS, Geneva, 6-8 February 1989. Geneva, 
WHO, 1989 (document reference WHO/GPA/BMR/89.5).

[page 75]
74
Access
CONSERvATION AND SUSTAINABlE USE OF MEDICINAl PlANTS
Updated edition: WHO/IUCN/WWF/TRAFFIC Guidelines on the Conservation 
of Medicinal Plants. WHO, IUCN, WWF, TRAFFIC (in preparation).
Medicinal Plants in Papua New Guinea. Manila, WHO Regional Office for the 
Western Pacific, 2009 (ISBN 978 92 9 061249 0).
WHO good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) monograph on 
Artemisia annua L. Geneva, WHO, 2006 (ISBN 978 92 4 159443 1). [C]
WHO Guidelines on good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) for 
medicinal plants. Geneva, WHO, 2003 (ISBN 92 4 154627 1). [A], [C], [F], 
[R], [S]
Medicinal plants in the Republic of Korea. Manila, WHO Regional Office for the 
Western Pacific, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series 
No. 21).
Medicinal plants in the South Pacific. Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western 
Pacific, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series No. 19).
WHO/IUCN/WWF Guidelines on the Conservation of Medicinal Plants. Gland, 
Switzerland, IUCN, 1993 (ISBN 2 8317 0136 8). [F], [S] 
Natural Resources and Human Health: Plants of Medicinal and Nutritional Value. 
Proceedings of the First WHO Symposium on Plants and Health for All: 
Scientific Advancement. Kobe, Japan, 26-28 August 1991. Amsterdam, 
Elsevier, 1992.
Conservation of Medicinal Plants. Proceedings of an International Consultation, 
Chiang Mai, Thailand, 21-27 March 1988. Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1991.
Medicinal plants in Viet Nam. Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 
1990 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series No. 3).
Medicinal plants in China . Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 
1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pacific Series No. 2).
ROlE OF TRADITIONAl MEDICINE IN Health care
Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health care. New Delhi, WHO 
Regional Office for South-East Asia, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 9 022382 5).
Report of WHO interregional workshop on the use of traditional medicines 
in primary health care. Geneva, WHO, 2009 (ISBN 978 92 4 159742 5) [F] 
(ISBN 978 92 4 259742 4), [R] (ISBN 978 92 4 459742 2), [S] (ISBN 978 92 
4 159742 5)
Guidelines for the Appropriate Use of Herbal Medicines. Manila, WHO Regional 
Office for the Western Pacific, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications, Western 
Pacific Series No. 23).
Traditional Practitioners as Primary Health care Workers. Geneva, WHO, 1995 
(document reference WHO/SHS/DHS/TRM/95.6).
Annex C

[page 76]
75
WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy
WHO/DANIDA Intercountry Course on the Appropriate Methodology for the Selection 
and Use of Traditional Remedies in National Health care Programme. Report 
of an Intercountry Course Held in Kadoma, Zimbabwe, 26 June-6 July 1989. 
Geneva, WHO, 1991 (document reference WHO/TRM/91.1).
Prospects for Involving Traditional Health Practitioners. Report of the Consultation 
on AIDS and Traditional Medicine, Francistown, Botswana, 23-27 July 1990. 
Geneva, WHO, 1990 (document reference WHO/TRM/GPA/90.1). [F]
The Role of Traditional Medicine in Primary Health care in China [based on an 
Inter-Regional Seminar Sponsored by the WHO in Association with the 
Ministry of Public Health of the People’s Republic of China, 9-21 October 
1985]. Geneva, WHO, 1986 (document reference WHO/TRM/86.2).
WHO/DANIDA Training Course: the Selection and Use of Traditional Remedies in 
Primary Health care. Report of an Inter-Regional Workshop Held in Bangkok, 
Thailand, 25 November–4 December 1985. Geneva, WHO, 1986 (document 
reference WHO/TRM/86.1).
Traditional Medicine and Health care Coverage . Geneva, WHO, 1983 (Reprinted 
1988).
Rational use
acuPuncture nOmenclature and terminOlOgy
WHO international standard terminologies on traditional medicine in the 
Western Pacific Region.), Manila, WHO Regional Office for the Western 
Pacific, 2007 (ISBN 978 92 9061 305 3; 978 92 9061 248 3).
Standard Acupuncture Nomenclature , 2nd ed. Manila, WHO Regional Office for 
the Western Pacific, 1993.
A Proposed Standard International Acupuncture Nomenclature: Report of a WHO 
Scientific Group. Geneva, WHO, 1991.
Report of the Working Group on Auricular Acupuncture Nomenclature. Lyon, 
France, 28-30 November 1990. Geneva, WHO, 1991 (document reference 
WHO/TRM/91.2).
CONSUMER INFORMATION AND EDUCATION
WHO guidelines on development of consumer information on proper use 
of traditional, complementary and alternative medicine. geneva, WHO, 
2004 (ISBN 92 4 159170 6). [C], [F]*, [S]* 
training and gOOd Practice
Benchmarks for training in Tuina. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 159968 
9). [F]*, [S]*
Benchmarks for training in Nuad Thai. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 
159967 2). [F]*, [S]*
Benchmarks for training in Osteopathy. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 
159966 5). [F]*, [S]*

[page 77]
76
Benchmarks for training in Unani medicine. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 
92 4 159964 1). [F]*, [S]*
Benchmarks for training in traditional Chinese medicine. geneva, WHO, 2010 
(ISBN 978 92 4 159963 4). [F]*, [S]*
Benchmarks for training in Naturopathy. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 
159965 8). [F]*, [S]*
Benchmarks for training in Ayurveda. Geneva, WHO, 2010 (ISBN 978 92 4 
159962 7). [F]*, [S]* 
WHO guidelines on basic training and safety in Chiropractic. geneva, WHO, 
2006 (ISBN 92 4 159371 7), [F] (ISBN 978 92 4 259371 6), [S] (ISBN 978 
92 4 559371 5)
Guidelines on Basic Training and Safety in Acupuncture. Geneva, WHO, 1999 
(document reference WHO/EDM/TRM/99.1). [F], [S]
Training Package of Practitioners of Traditional Medicine. Manila, WHO Regional 
Office for the Western Pacific, 1999.
Guidelines for Training Traditional Health Practitioners in Primary Health care. 
Geneva, WHO, 1995 (document reference WHO/SHS/DHS/TRM/95.5).
Annex C

[page 78]
W H O T r a d i t i o n a l M e d i c i n e S t r a t e g y 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 2 3
2 0 1 4 - 2 0 2 3
WHO Traditional 
Medicine Strategy