课程 - 国家高等教育智慧教育平台 
首页 
课程 
教材 
虚仿实验 
教师教研 
研究生教育 
创课平台 
课外成长 
专题 
慕课西部行 
资讯 
医学 
中医学类 
Diagnostics of TCM（中医诊断学） 
Diagnostics of TCM（中医诊断学） 
1000+ 人选课 
更新日期：2026/09/25 
开课平台 爱课程（中国大学MOOC） 
开课高校 南京中医药大学 
开课教师 钱峻 、 徐征 、 谷鑫 、 史话跃 、 顾任钧 、 张玲玲 、 胥波 、 姚颖 、 任威铭 、 张晗 、 张箫箫 、 沈怡婷 
学科专业 医学 中医学类 
开课时间 2026/03/01 - 2026/07/31 
课程周期 22 周 
开课状态 已结课 
每周学时 - 
现在去学习 
课程简介 
查看更多 
Diagnostics of TCM(DTCM) is one of the professional basic courses of TCM colleges and universities, it is a subject in which we studies basic rules, knowledge and technique related to the four diagnostic methods, disease differentiation and syndrome differentiation, which is guided by fundamental theories of TCM. By learning this course, beginners can lay the foundation for later studies of TCM Materia Medica, Formulas, and other clinical related subjects. Thus we call our course the bridge connecting basic theories of TCM with clinical subjects. 
中医诊断学是中医药院校的专业基础课程之一，是在中医基础理论的指导下，研究诊察病情、判断病种、辨别证候的基础理论、基本知识和基本技能的学科。初学者通过本学科的学习， 
可以为后续课程的学习奠定基础，如中药学、方剂学、以及临床各科。所以，我们称中医诊断学为桥梁学科。 
There are two main bodies in our course, one is the 4 Diagnostic Methods, the other is Syndrome Differentiation. The 4 Diagnostic Methods consist of diagnosis through inspection(including tongue diagnosis), listening and smelling, inquiry as well as pulse taking and palpation. As for syndrome differentiation, it is composed of Eight-Principle Syndrome Differentiation, Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Natures(including Six-Excessive-Climatic-Factor Syndrome Differentiation, Deficiency of Yin & Yang Syndrome Differentiation, Qi-Blood & Body Fluids Syndrome Differentiation) and Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Locations(including Zang-Fu Organs Syndrome Differentiation, Wei-Qi-Ying-Xue Phases Syndrome Differentiation, Six-jing Syndrome Differentiation, Three-Jiao Syndrome Differentiation, Meridian Syndrome Differentiation ) 
本课程以诊法、辨证为主体内容，其中诊法部分涉及望诊（包括舌诊），闻诊（包括听声音、嗅气味），问诊，切诊（包括脉诊、按诊）四诊，辨证部分包括八纲辨证，病性辨证（包括六淫辨证、阴阳虚损辨证、气血津液辨证），病位辨证（包括脏腑辨证、六经辨证、卫气营血辨证、三焦辨证和经络辨证）。 
By learning this course, we could cultivate our unique thinking mode of diagnosis and treatment of TCM so as to grasp the possible clinical significance of specific manifestations gathered through the 4 diagnostic methods, as well as nearly 100 syndromes based on the 4 diagnostic methods related to their concepts, clinical manifestations and key points of differentiating symptoms. In the process of our study, we could also do comprehensive applications with all methods of syndrome differentiation for further study. 
通过这门课程的学习，我们大家可以逐步树立中医诊疗思维方式，掌握中医通过望、闻、问、切所搜集病情的资料对中医诊断的基本价值和意义，掌握具体证型的概念、临床表现和辨证要点，掌握各种辨证方法的综合运用，为后期各中医相关课程的学习打下坚实的基础。 
As a supporting resource for Online-offline Mixed Teaching Mode, our course has a certain space for expansion. The characteristics of the course taught in English are mainly reflected in the following two aspects. Firstly, this online course covers all the contents of DTCM. Based on the knowledge points of our course, it pays attention to the cultivation of TCM thinking, as well as the connections of different knowledge points. Secondly, all-English lectures with bilingual subtitles provide students with more space for learning, thinking and ability training, which could help them improve their abilities of bilingual thinking and expression, in order that they could become international bilingual talents of TCM in the future. 
本课程作为线上、线下混合教学模式的支撑资源，具有一定的拓展空间。其特色和亮点主要体现在两个方面。一是本在线课程涵盖了本学课的所有内容，立足课程知识点传授，注重启发中医思维和知识点连接。二是课程的全英文讲解和中英文字幕，给学有余力的同学更多学习、思考和能力训练的空间，有助于提升学生双语思维、表达能力，助力中医药国际化双语人才的培养。 
Welcome to DTCM learning, please join us for further communications. 
欢迎加入中医诊断学的学习，让我们一起交流提高！ 
课程大纲 
查看更多 
Introduction（绪论）
1. Introduction 绪论
Inspection 1 （全身望诊等）
2.1 Inspection of Vitality （望神）
2.2 Inspection of Complexion, Body and Posture （望面色形态）
2.3 Inspection of Parts, Excreta and Infant Index Finger Venules （局部望诊、望小儿指纹）
2.4 Basic Introduction to Tongue Diagnosis（舌诊概说）
2.5 Inspection of Tongue Body（望舌质）
2.6 Inspection of Tongue Coating, etc. （望舌苔等）
Listening and Smelling
3. Listening and Smelling
Inquiry （问诊）
4.1 Introduction to Inquiry, Inquiry of Cold & Fever（问诊概说，问寒热）
4.2 Inquiry of Sweating and Pain（问汗、问疼痛）
4.3 Inquiry of Sleeping, etc.（问睡眠等）
4.4 Inquiry of Thirst & Drinking, Appetite and Taste（问饮食口味）
4.5 Inquiry of Stool and Urine（问二便）
4.6 Inquiry of Women, Men & Children（问诊妇女、男子和儿童）
Pulse-taking and Palpation（切诊）
5.1 Introduction to Pulse-taking（脉诊概说）
5.2 Pathological Pulses 1（病理性脉象1）
5.3 Pathological Pulses 2（病理性脉象2）
5.4 Summary of Pulse-taking, Palpation（脉诊总结，按诊）
Eignt-principle Syndrome Differentiation（八纲辨证）
6.1 Basic Syndromes of Eight-principle（八纲基本证）
6.2 Relationships among Syndromes of Eight Principles（八纲证之间的关系）
Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Nature（病性辨证）
7.1 Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Nature 1（病性辨证1）
7.2 Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Nature 2（病性辨证2）
7.3 Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Nature 3（病性辨证3）
Syndrome Differentiation of Disease Location（病性辨证）
8.1 Heart & Small Intestine SD（心和小肠病证）
8.2 Lung & Large Intestine SD（肺和大肠病证）
8.3 Spleen & Stomach SD（脾和胃病证）
8.4 Liver & Gallbladder SD（肝和胆病证）
8.5 Kidney & Urinary Bladder SD（肾和膀胱病证）
8.6 Combined Zang-fu Organs SD（脏腑兼证）
8.7 Other Methods of SD（其它辨证）
扫码下载 App 
扫码关注我们 
©2023 国家高等教育智慧教育平台 版权所有 京ICP备12020869号-30 京公网安备 11010202010520号 
联系我们 关于网站 帮助中心 隐私政策 知识产权声明 
关注我们 
网站运维：高等教育出版社